TEACHINGS OF THE BUDDHA


Be

Middle Length

Discourses


A New Translation of the

Majjhima Nikaya

#

Translated by

Bhikkhu Nanarnoli and Bhikkhu Bodh





;.s bo<


Mafjbirn


oidcst r
tsaclim!


I tit: M i
as the B
v-Jiict y i.


1 i.U’se t
fclsr.J.'UCt.
untold i
show t!
from th
society:
ascetics


with ill


n,e Middle Length Discourses
of the Buddha



exp Ian
a ion vv
B 1.1 ri ell ■
in ian>
cone a
clarifit
value,



TEACHINGS OF THE BUDDHA


A New Translation of the

Vfaiihima Nikava


Translated from the Pali


Original translation

by

Bhikkhu Nanamoli


Translation edited and revised

by

Bhikkhu Bodhi


Buddhist Publication Society




This bc
Majjhii
il:-.: fki;
■if! Pal-
Tituav
Old i

teachii i
middle
longer .
I l ie M
as die J
variety
most a
1 tiese -
instnic
untold
show ti
from t i
society
ascetic



with ill
course,
resplei
passios

Th e tr|
transia 1
BhtkkJ:

revises
who pi
explan
slot: w
Buddh

in Ian-
concei
clarilis
value.


First published in 1995
Wisdom Publications
361 Newbury Street
Boston, Massachusetts 02115 USA


Publis.i • N.

Buddhist Pu.

P.O. L

54, Sangharaja Mawab jy, Sri Lanka
Copies of this publication are for sale in Asia only.

© 1995 Bhikkhu Bodhi .


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data

Tipitaka. Suttapitaka. Majjhimanikaya. English

The middle length discourses of the Buddha : a new translation of
the Majjhima Nikaya / original translation by Bhikkhu Nanamoli ;
trahslation edited and revised by Bhikkhu Bodhi.
p. cm. — (Teachings of the Buddha)

Includes bibliographical references and index.

ISBN 0-86171-072-X

I. Nanamoli, Bhikkhu, d. 1960. II. Bodhi, Bhikkhu.

III. Series.

BQ1312.E5N36 1995

294.3'823— dc20 * k 7 636

ISBN 955-24-C

00 99 98 97
6 5 4 3 2

Designed by: LJ-SAWLit 1

Set in DPalatino 10 on 12.4 point by John Bullitt an .. awlit

This book is printed on acid-free paper and meets the guidelines
for permanence and durability of the Committee on Production Guidelines for Book
Longevity of the Council on Library Resources.

Printed in the United States of America


II


Contents


Preface 13

Introduction 19

Summary of the 152 Suttas 61


part one: the root fifty discourses ( Mulapannasapali )

1 THE division of the discourse on the root
(Mulapariyayavagga)

1 Mulapariyaya Sutta : The Root of All Things 83

2 Sabbasava Sutta: All the Taints 91

3 Dhammadayada Sutta : Heirs in Dhamma 97

4 Bhayabherava Sutta: Fear and Dread 102

5 Anangana Sutta: Without Blemishes 108

6 Akankheyya Sutta: If a Bhikkhu Should Wish 115

7 Vatthupama Sutta: The Simile of the Cloth 118

8 Sallekha Sutta: Effacement 123

9 Sammaditthi Sutta: Right View 132

10 Satipatthana Sutta: The Foundations of Mindfulness 145

2 the division of the lion's roar ( Slhanadavagga )

11 Culasihanada Sutta: The Shorter Discourse on

the Lion's Roar 159

12 Mahaslhanada Sutta: The Greater Discourse on

the Lion's Roar 164

13 Mahadukkhakkhandha Sutta: The Greater Discourse on the

Mass of Suffering 179

14 Culadukkhakkhandha Sutta: The Shorter Discourse on the

Mass of Suffering 186


5


6 The Majjhima Nikdya


15 Anumana Sutta : Inference 190

16 Cetokhila Sutta : The Wilderness in the Heart 194

17 Vanapattha Sutta : Jungle Thickets 198

18 Madhupindika Sutta-. The Honey Ball 201

19 Dvedhavitakka Sutta: Two Kinds of Thought 207

20 Vitakkasanthana Sutta: The Removal of Distracting

Thoughts 211

3 the third division ( Tatiyavagga )

21 KakacQpama Sutta: The Simile of the Saw 217

22 Alagaddupama Sutta: The Simile of the Snake 224

23 Vammika Sutta: The Ant-hill 237

24 Rathavinita Sutta: The Relay Chariots 240

25 Nivapa Sutta: The Bait 246

26 Ariyapariyesana Sutta: The Noble Search 253

27 Culahatthipadopama Sutta: The Shorter Discourse on the

Simile of the Elephant's Footprint 269

28 Mahahatthipadopama Sutta: The Greater Discourse on the

Simile of the Elephant's Footprint 278

29 Mahasaropama Sutta: The Greater Discourse on the Simile

of the Heartwood 286

30 Culasaropama Sutta: The Shorter Discourse on the Simile of

the Heartwood 291

4 the great division of Pairs ( Mahayamakavagga )

»

31 Culagosinga Sutta: The Shorter Discourse in Gosinga 301

32 MahUgosinga Sutta: The Greater Discourse in Gosinga 307

33 Mahagopdlaka Sutta: The Greater Discourse on the

Cowherd 313

34 Culagopdlaka Sutta: The Shorter Discourse on the

Cowherd 319

35 Culasaccaka Sutta: The Shorter Discourse to Saccaka 322

36 Mahasaccaka Sutta: The Greater Discourse to Saccaka 332

37 Culatanhasankhaya Sutta: The Shorter Discourse on the

Destruction of Craving 344

38 MaMtanhasankhaya Sutta: The Greater Discourse on the

Destruction of Craving 349

39 Maha-Assapura Sutta: The Greater Discourse at

Assapura 362


Table of Contents 7


40 Cula-Assapura Sutta: The Shorter Discourse at

Assapura 372

5 the shorter division of pairs ( Culayamakavagga )

41 Saleyyaka Sutta : The Brahmins of Sala 379

42 Veranjaka Sutta: The Brahmins of Veranja 386

43 Mahavedalla Sutta: The Greater Series of Questions and

Answers 387

44 Culavedalla Sutta: The Shorter Series of Questions and

Answers 396

45 Culadhammasamadana Sutta: The Shorter Discourse on

Ways of Undertaking Things 405

46 Mahadhammasamadana Sutta: The Greater Discourse on

Ways of Undertaking Things 408

47 Vtmamsaka Sutta: The Inquirer 415

48 Kosambiya Sutta: The Kosambians 419

49 Brahmanimantanika Sutta: The Invitation of a Brahma 424

50 Maratajjamya Sutta: The Rebuke to Mara 431

PART TWO: THE middle FIFTY discourses ( Majjhimapannasapali )

1 the division on householders ( Gahapativagga )

51 Kandaraka Sutta: To Kandaraka 443

52 Atthakanagara Sutta: The Man from Atthakanagara 454

53 Sekha Sutta: The Disciple in Higher Training 460

54 Potaliya Sutta: To Potaliya 466

55 Jtvaka Sutta: To Jlvaka 474

56 Upali Sutta: To Upali 477

57 Kukkuravatika Sutta: The Dog-duty Ascetic 493

58 Abhayarajakumara Sutta: To Prince Abhaya 498

59 Bahuvedamya Sutta: The Many Kinds of Feeling 502 ,

60 Apannaka Sutta: The Incontrovertible Teaching 506

2 the division on bhikkhus (Bhikkhuvagga)

61 Ambalatthikarahulovada Sutta: Advice to Rahula at

Ambalatthika 523

62 Maharahulovada Sutta: The Greater Discourse of Advice to

Rahula 527


8 The Majjhima Nikaya


63 Culamalunkya Sutta: The Shorter Discourse to

Malunkyaputta 533

64 Mahamalunkya Sutta: The Greater Discourse to

Malunkyaputta 537

65 Bhaddali Sutta: To Bhaddali 542

66 Latukikopama Sutta: The Simile of the Quail 551

67 Catumd Sutta: At Catuma 560

68 Nalakapana Sutta: At Nalakapana 566

69 Gulissani Sutta: Gulissani 572

70 Kitdgiri Sutta: At Kltagiri 577

3 the division on wanderers ( Paribbajakavagga )

71 Tevijjavacchagotta Sutta: To Vacchagotta on the Threefold

True Knowledge 587

72 Aggivacchagotta Sutta: To Vacchagotta on Fire 590

73 Mahavacchagotta Sutta: The Greater Discourse to

Vacchagotta 595

74 Dighanakha Sutta: To Dlghanakha 603

75 Magandiya Sutta: To Magandiya 607

76 Sandaka Sutta: To Sandaka 618

77 Mahasakuludayi Sutta: The Greater Discourse to

Sakuludayin 629

78 Samanamandika Sutta: Samanamandikaputta -648

79 Culasakuludayi Sutta: The Shorter Discourse to

Sakuludayin 654

80 Vekhanassa Sutta: To Vekhanassa 663

4 the division on kings ( Rajavagga )

81 Ghatikara Sutta: Ghatlkara the Potter 669

82 Ratthapala Sutta: On Ratthapala 677

83 Makhadeva Sutta: King Makhadeva 692

84 Madhura Sutta: At Madhura 698

85 Bodhirajakumara Sutta: To Prince Bodhi 704

86 Angulimala Sutta: On Angulimala 710

87 Piyajatika Sutta: Born from Those Who Are Dear 718

88 Bahitika Sutta: The Cloak 723

89 Dhammacetiya Sutta: Monuments to the Dhamma 728

90 Kannakatthala Sutta: At Kannakatthala 734


Table of Contents 9


5 the division on brahmins ( Brahmanavagga )

91 Brahmayu Sutta : Brahmayu 743

92 Sela Sutta : To Sela 755

93 Assalayana Sutta-. To Assalayana 763

94 Ghotamukha Sutta : To Ghotamukha 771

95 CankT Sutta: With Cankl 775

96 Esukart Sutta: To Esukarl 786

97 Dhananjani Sutta: To Dhananjani 791

98 Vasettha Sutta: To Vasettha 798

99 Subha Sutta: To Subha 808

100 Sangarava Sutta: To Sangarava 819


part three: the final fifty discourses ( Uparipannasapali )

1 the division at devadaha ( Devadahavagga )

101 Devadaha Sutta: At Devadaha 827

102 Pahcattaya Sutta: The Five and Three 839

103 Kind Sutta: What Do You Think About Me? 847

104 SamagUma Sutta: At Samagama 853

105 Sunakkhatta Sutta: To Sunakkhatta 861

106 Anehjasappaya Sutta: The Way to the Imperturbable 869

107 GanakamoggallUna Sutta: To Ganaka Moggallana 874

108 Gopakamoggallana Sutta: With Gopaka Moggallana 880

109 Mahapunnama Sutta: The Greater Discourse on the

Full-moon Night 887

110 Culapunnama Sutta: The Shorter Discourse on the

Full-moon Night 892

2 the division of one by one ( Anupadavagga )

111 Anupada Sutta: One by One As They Occurred 899

112 Chabbisodhana Sut ta: The Sixfold Purity 903

113 Sappurisa Sutta: The True Man 909

114 Sevitabbasevitabba Sutta: To Be Cultivated and Not To Be

Cultivated 913

115 Bahudhatuka Sutta: The Many Kinds of Elements 925

116 Isigili Sutta: Isigili: The Gullet of the Seers 931

117 Mahacattarlsaka Sutta: The Great Forty 934


10 The Majjhima Nikaya


118 Anapanasati Sutta: Mindfulness of Breathing 941

119 Kayagatasati Sutta: Mindfulness of the Body 949

120 Sankharupapatti Sutta : Reappearance by Aspiration 959

3 the division on voidness ( Suhnatavagga )

121 Culasunnata Sutta: The Shorter Discourse on

Voidness 965

122 Mahasunnata Sutta: The Greater Discourse on

Voidness 971

123 Acchariya-abbhuta Sutta: Wonderful and Marvellous 979

124 Bakkula Sutta: Bakkula 985

125 Dantabhumi Sutta: The Grade of the Tamed 989

126 Bhumija Sutta: Bhumija 997

127 Anuruddha Sutta: Anuruddha 1002

128 Upakkilesa Sutta: Imperfections 1008

129 Balapandita Sutta: Fools and Wise Men 1016

130 Devaduta Sutta: The Divine Messengers 1029

4 THE DIVISION of expositions (V ibhangavagga)

131 Bhaddekaratta Sutta: One Fortunate Attachment 1039

132 Anandabhaddekaratta Sutta: Ananda and One Fortunate

Attachment 1042

133 Mahakaccanabhaddekaratta Sutta: Maha Kaccana and One

Fortunate Attachment 1044

134 Lomasakangiyabhaddekaratta Sutta: Lomasakangiya and One

Fortunate Attachment , 1050

135 Culakammavibhanga Sutta: The Shorter Exposition of

Action 1053

136 Mahdkammavibhanga Sutta: The Greater Exposition of

Action 1058

137 Salayatanavibhanga Sutta: The Exposition of the Sixfold

Base 1066

138 Uddesavibhanga Sutta: The Exposition of a Summary 1074

139 Aranavibhanga Sutta: The Exposition of Non-conflict 1080

140 Dhdtuvibhanga Sutta: The Exposition of the

Elements 1087

141 Saccavibhanga Sutta: The Exposition of the Truths 1097

142 Dakkhinavibhanga Sutta: The Exposition of Offerings 1102


Table of Contents 11


5 the division of the sixfold base ( Salayatanavagga )

143 Anathapindikovada Sutta: Advice to Anathapindika 1109

144 Channovada Sutta: Advice to Channa 1114

145 Punnovada Sutta: Advice to Punna 1117

146 Nandakovada Sutta: Advice from Nandaka 1120

147 Culardhulovada Sutta: The Shorter Discourse of Advice to

Rahula 1126

148 Chachakka Sutta: The Six Sets of Six 1129

149 Mahasalayatanika Sutta: The Great Sixfold Base 1137

150 Nagaravindeyya Sutta: To the Nagaravindans 1140

151 PindapatapHrisuddhi Sutta: The Purification of

Almsfood 1143

152 Indriyabhavana Sutta: The Development of the

Faculties 1147

Bibliography 1155
List of Abbreviations 1159
Notes 1161

Pali-English Glossary 1361
Index of Subjects 1377
Index of Proper Names 1401
Index of Similes 1407
Index of Pali Terms Discussed in Introduction
and Notes 1411



Preface


The present work offers a complete translation of the Majjhima
Nikaya, The Middle Length Discourses of the Buddha, one of the
major collections in the Sutta Pitaka or "Basket of Discourses"
belonging to the Pali Canon. This vast body of scriptures,
recorded in the ancient Indian language now known as Pali, is
regarded by the Theravada school of Buddhism as the definitive
recension of the Buddha-word, and among scholars too it is gen-
erally considered our most reliable source for the original teach-
ings of the historical Buddha Gotama.

This translation is an extensively revised version of an original
draft translation made by the distinguished English scholar-
monk, Bhikkhu Nanamoli (1905-1960). During his eleven years'
life in the Buddhist Order, passed entirely at the Island
Hermitage in south Sri Lanka, Ven. Nanamoli had rendered into
English some of the most difficult and intricate texts of Pali
Buddhism, among them the encyclopaedic Visuddhimagga.
Following his premature death at the age of 55, three thick
hand-bound notebooks containing a handwritten translation of
the entire Majjhima Nikaya were found among his effects.
However, although all 152 suttas of the Majjhima had been trans-
lated, the work was obviously still in an ongoing process of revi-
sion, with numerous crossouts and overwritings and a fair num-
ber of unresolved inconsistencies. The translation also employed
an experimental scheme of highly original renderings for Pali
doctrinal terms that Ven. Nanamoli had come to prefer to his ear-
lier scheme and had overwritten into the notebooks. He had used
this new set of renderings in several of his final publications,
offering an explanation for his choices in an appendix to The


13



14 The Majjhima Nikaya


Minor Readings and The Illustrator of Ultimate Meaning, his transla-
tion of the Khuddakapatha and its commentary.

In 1976 Bhikkhu Khantipalo made a selection of ninety suttas
from the notebooks, which he edited into a fairly consistent and
readable version rearranged according to a topical sequence he
himself devised. This was published in Thailand in three vol-
umes under the title A Treasury of the Buddha's Words. In this
edition Ven. Khantipalo had endeavoured to make as few
changes as possible in the original translation by Ven.
Nanamoli, though he inevitably found it desirable to replace
some of the latter's innovative renderings with better-known
equivalents, generally choosing the terminology that Ven.
Nanamoli had used in The Path of Purification, his excellent
translation of the Visuddhimagga.

The present work contains finished translations of all 152
suttas. In editing the ninety suttas selected by Ven. Khantipalo,
I have worked from the version found in A Treasury of the
Buddha's Words, referring to Ven. Nanamoli's notebooks when-
ever questions arose or problematic passages were encountered.
The other sixty-two suttas had to be freshly edited from the
notebooks. The translations of all 152 suttas have been checked
against the original Pali texts and I hope that all errors and
omissions have been rectified.

My aim in editing and revising this material, I must frankly
state, has not been to reconstruct the suttas in a way that would
conform as closely as possible to the intentions of the original
translator. My aim has been, rather, to turn out a translation of
the Majjhima Nikaya that simultaneously approaches two
ideals: first, fidelity to the intended meaning of the texts them-
selves; and second, the expression of that meaning in an idiom
that would be intelligible to a modern reader seeking in the Pali
suttas personal guidance in the proper understanding and con-
duct of life. Terminological exactitude and internal consistency
have been important guidelines underlying the endeavour to
achieve those ideals, but care has been taken that their pursuit
should leave the translation transparent as to the meaning.

To produce a translation of the Majjhima Nikaya that is both
technically precise and lucid in expression required numerous
revisions in the manuscript version. Most were quite minor but
a few were substantial. Numerous alterations were made in the


Preface 15


rendering of Pali doctrinal terms, most of Ven. Khantipalo's
changes having been incorporated. In place of Ven. Nanamoli's
novel renderings I have in most cases returned to the clearer and
better established terminology he employed in The Path of
Purification. When doubts arose I always turned for help to Ven.
Nyanaponika Mahathera, whose wise advice helped to steer
this translation closer towards its two guiding ideals. The han-
dling of several important technical terms is discussed at the
end of the Introduction, to which is attached a list showing the
terminological changes that were made for this edition. By con-
sulting the list the reader can obtain some idea of how the man-
uscript translation read. A glossary in the back gives the
English renderings used for the major Pali doctrinal terms
found in the Majjhima Nikaya as well as Pali words and mean-
ings not included in the Pali Text Society's Pali-English
Dictionary. The subject index also includes, for most entries, the
Pali term after its chosen English rendering. Botanical names
that could not be easily rendered by familiar English equiva-
lents have been left untranslated.

Ven. Nanamoli's translation was based primarily on the Pali
Text Society's roman-script edition of the Majjhima Nikaya,
published in three volumes, the first edited by V. Trenckner
(1888), the second two by Robert Chalmers (1898, 1899). This
edition was also used to check the translation, but on problemat-
ic passages I consulted as well two other editions: the Burmese
Buddhasasana Samiti's Sixth Buddhist Council edition in
Burmese script and the Sinhala-script Buddha Jayanti edition
published in Sri Lanka. Instances are not unusual where the
reading in one or the other of these editions was preferred to
that of the PTS edition, though only occasionally are these men-
tioned in the notes. Seldom too do the notes refer to I. B.
Horner's long-standing English translation of the Majjhima
Nikaya, The Collection of the Middle Length Sayings, with which I
sometimes compared Ven. Nanamoli's translation. Since the first
volume of that translation was published in 1954, and the next
two in 1957 and 1959, while Ven. Nanamoli's manuscript indi-
cates that he did his revised translation between 1953 and 1956,
it seems unlikely that he had consulted Horner's version in
preparing his own; at most, he might have had access to the first
volume after he had completed his first volume.


16 The Majjhima Nikaya


The text of the translation is divided into numerical sections.
These divisions were introduced by Ven. Nanamoli into his
manuscript version of the suttas and are not found in the PTS
edition of the Majjhima Nikaya. Sometimes, when logic seemed
to dictate it, I have made minor alterations in the divisions. The
section numbers are included in the sutta references in the
Introduction, Notes, and Indexes. Thus, for example, a reference
to MN 26.18 means Majjhima Sutta No. 26, section 18.

The numbers at the top of the pages refer to the volume and
page number of the PTS edition of the Majjhima Nikaya, as do
the bracketed numbers embedded in the text (except for MN 92
and MN 98, wherein the numbers refer to the PTS edition of the
Sutta Nipata).

The Introduction aims to provide the reader with a thorough
study guide to the Majjhima Nikaya by systematically surveying
the principal teachings of the Buddha contained in this collec-
tion along with references to the suttas where fuller expositions
of those teachings can be found. More elementary information
on the Pali Canon and on Pali Buddhism in general will be
found in Maurice Walshe's introduction to his recent translation
of the complete Dlgha Nikaya, Thus Have I Heard, which the .pre-
sent publication is intended to parallel. As a way of easing the
reader's entrance into the canonical texts themselves, a sum-
mary of the Majjhima's 152 suttas follows the Introduction.

To clarify difficult passages in the suttas and to shed addition-
al light on passages whose meaning is richer than appears at
first sight, a copious set of back notes has been provided. Many
of these notes are drawn from the commentaries on the
Majjhima, of which there are two. One is the commentary prop-
er, the Majjhima Nikaya Atthakatha, also known as the
Payahcasudani. This was composed in the fifth century by the
great Buddhist commentator,.Acariya Buddhaghosa, who based
it on the ancient commentaries (no longer extant) that had been
preserved for centuries by the Sangha of the Mahavihara at
Anuradhapura in Sri Lanka. The commentary is of value not
only for elucidating the meaning of the texts but also for filling
in the background of events that led to the promulgation of the
discourses. The other commentarial work is the subcommen-
tary, the Majjhima Nikaya Tlka, ascribed to Acariya Dhammapala,


Preface 17


who probably lived and worked in South India a century or
more later than Acariya Buddhaghosa. The main purpose of the
Tlka is to clear up obscure or difficult points in the Atthakatha,
but in doing so the author often sheds additional light on the
meaning of the canonical text. In order to keep the notes as con-
cise as possible, almost always the commentaries have been
paraphrased rather than quoted directly.

I am aware that the Notes sometimes repeat things already
explained in the Introduction, but in a work of this nature such
repetitions can be of use, particularly as novel ideas briefly treat-
ed in the Introduction may slip the reader's memory at the time
of reading a sutta to which they pertain.

In conclusion I want to mention the contributions that others
have made to the completion of this project.

First, I wish to thank Ven. Nyanaponika Mahathera for first
encouraging me to take up this task, which seemed so daunting
at the outset, and then for providing valuable advice at every
crucial turn along the way. Not only was he always ready to dis-
cuss difficult points, but despite deteriorating vision, which
drastically reduced the time he had available for reading, he still
read through the Introduction, the Notes, and the knottier sut-
tas, offering helpful suggestions.

Second, I thank Ven. Khantipalo (now Laurence Mills) for per-
mission to use his versions of the ninety suttas in A Treasury of
the Buddha's Words as the working basis for this edition. The
work he did on those suttas almost two decades ago greatly
facilitated the preparation of this volume.

Third, I must mention the tremendous help received from
Ayya Nyanasirl, who subedited the initial draft, made numer-
ous suggestions for minor improvements, and typed out the
entire manuscript. Even though, as my conception of the
editorial task changed, several suttas had , to be typed a second
time, and a few a third time, this was always done with patience
and understanding.

Fourth, I thank two fellow bhikkhus, Ven. Thanissaro (U.S.A.)
and Ven. Dhammaviharl (Sri Lanka), for reading portions of the
manuscript and suggesting minor improvements.

Finally, I wish to express my appreciation to Dr. Nicholas
Ribush for his encouragement and helpfulness and to Wisdom


18 The Majjhima Nikaya


Publications for doing such a fine job of production. I am par-
ticularly grateful to John Bullitt for his careful and precise
management of this project.

For any errors or defects that remain, I myself am fully
responsible.

BHIKKHU BODHI
Forest Hermitage
Kandy, Sri Lanka


Introduction


THE MAJJHIMA NIKAYA AS A COLLECTION

The Majjhima NikAya is the second collection of the Buddha's
discourses found in the Sutta Pitaka of the Pali Canon. Its title
means literally the Middle Collection, and it is so called because
the suttas it contains are generally of middle length, compared
with the longer suttas of the Digha Nikaya, which precedes it,
and the shorter suttas making up the two major collections that
follow it, the Samyutta Nikaya and the Anguttara Nikaya.

The Majjhima Nikaya consists of 152 suttas. These are divided
into three parts called Sets of Fifty ( pannasa ), though the last set
actually contains fifty-two suttas. Within each part the suttas are
further grouped into chapters or divisions ( vagga ) of ten suttas
each, the next to the last division containing twelve suttas. The
names assigned to these divisions are often derived solely from
the titles of their opening sutta (or, in some cases, pair of suttas)
and thus are scarcely indicative of the material found within the
divisions themselves. A partial exception is the Middle Fifty,
where the division titles usually refer to the principal type of
interlocutor or key figure in each of the suttas they contain.
Even then the connection between the title and the contents is
sometimes tenuous. The entire system of classification appears
to have been devised more for the purpose of convenience than
because of any essential homogeneity of subject matter in the
suttas comprised under a single division.

There is also no particular pedagogical sequence in the suttas,
no unfolding development of thought. Thus while different suttas
illuminate each other and one will fill in ideas merely suggested
by another, virtually any sutta may be taken up for individual


19


20 The Majjhima Nikaya


study and will be found comprehensible on its own. Of course,
the study of the entire compilation will naturally yield the richest
harvest of understanding.

If the Majjhima Nikaya were to be characterised by a single
phrase to distinguish it from among the other books of the Pali
Canon, this might be done by describing it as the collection that
combines the richest variety of contextual settings with the
deepest and most comprehensive assortment of teachings. Like
the Dlgha Nikaya, the Majjhima is replete with drama and nar-
rative, while lacking much of its predecessor's tendency
towards imaginative embellishment and profusion of legend.
Like the Samyutta, it contains some of the profoundest discourses
in the Canon, disclosing the Buddha's radical insights into the
nature of existence; and like the Anguttara, it covers a wide
range of topics of practical applicability. In contrast to those two
Nikayas, however, the Majjhima sets forth this material not in
the form of short, self-contained utterances, but in the context of
a fascinating procession of scenarios that exhibit the Buddha's
resplendence of wisdom, his skill in adapting his teachings to
the needs and proclivities of his interlocutors, his wit and gentle
humour, his majestic sublimity, and his compassionate humanity.

• Naturally the greatest number of discourses in the Majjhima
are addressed to the bhikkhus - the monks - since they lived in
closest proximity to the Master and had followed him into
homelessness to take upon themselves his complete course of
training. But in the Majjhima we do not meet the Buddha only in
his role as head of the Order .> Repeatedly we see him engaged in
living dialogue with people from the many different strata of
ancient Indian society - with kings and princes, with brahmins
and ascetics, with simple villagers and erudite philosophers,
with earnest seekers and vain disputants. It is perhaps in this
scripture above all others that the Buddha emerges in the role
ascribed to him in the canonical verse of homage to the Blessed
One as "the incomparable leader of persons to be tamed, the
teacher of gods and humans."

It is not the Buddha alone who appears in the Majjhima in the
role of teacher. The work also introduces us to the accomplished
disciples he produced who carried on the transmission of his
teaching. Of the 152 suttas in the collection, nine are spoken by
the venerable Sariputta, the General of the Dhamma; three of


Introduction 21


these (MN 9, MN 28, MN 141) have become basic texts for the
study of Buddhist doctrine in monastic schools throughout the
Theravada Buddhist world. The venerable Ananda, the
Buddha's personal attendant during the last twenty-five years of
his life, delivers seven suttas and participates in many more.
Four suttas are spoken by the venerable Maha Kaccana, who
excelled in elaborating upon the brief but enigmatic sayings of
the Master, and two by the second chief disciple, the venerable
Maha Moggallana, one of which (MN 15) has been recommended
for a monk's daily reflections. A dialogue between the venerable
Sariputta and the venerable Punna Mantaniputta (MN 24)
explores a scheme of seven stages of purification that was to
form the outline for Acariya Buddhaghosa's great treatise on the
Buddhist path, the Visuddhimagga. Another dialogue (MN 44)
introduces the bhikkhunl Dhammadinna, whose replies to a
series of probing questions were so adroit that the Buddha
sealed them for posterity with the words "I would have
explained it to you in the same way."

The formats of the suttas are also highly variegated. The
majority take the form of discourses proper, expositions of the
teaching that pour forth uninterrupted from the mouth of the
Enlightened One. A few among these are delivered in a series of
unadorned instructional propositions or guidelines to practice,
but most are interlaced with striking similes and parables,
which flash through and light up the dense mass of doctrine in
ways that impress it deeply upon the mind. Other suttas unfold
in dialogue and discussion, and in some the dramatic or narra-
tive element predominates. Perhaps the best known and most
widely appreciated among these is the Angulimdla Sutta
(MN 86), which relates how the Buddha subdued the notorious
bandit Angulimala and transformed him into an enlightened
saint. Equally moving, though in a different way, is the story of
Ratthapala (MN 82), the youth of wealthy family whose preco-
cious insight into the universality of suffering was so compelling
that he was prepared to die rather than accept his parents'
refusal to permit him to go forth into homelessness. Several sut-
tas centre upon debate, and these highlight the Buddha's wit
and delicate sense of irony as well as his dialectical skills.
Particular mention might be made of MN 35 and MN 56, with
their subtle humour leavening the seriousness of their contents.


22 The Majjhima Nikaya


In a class of its own is the Brahmanimantanika Sutta (MN 49), in
which the Buddha visits the Brahma-world to detach a deluded
deity from his illusions of grandeur and soon finds himself
locked in a gripping contest with Mara the Evil One - an incon-
ceivable alliance of Divinity and Devil defending the sanctity of
being against the Buddha's call for deliverance into Nibbana,
the cessation of being.

THE BUDDHA IN THE MAJJHIMA NIKAYA

Biographical information for its own sake was never an overrid-
ing concern of the redactors of the Pali Canon, and thus the data
the Majjhima provides on the life of the Buddha is scanty and
uncoordinated, included principally because of the light it sheds
on the Buddha as the ideal exemplar of the spiritual quest and
the fully qualified teacher. Nevertheless, though it subordinates
biography to other concerns, the Majjhima does give us the
fullest canonical account of the Master's early life as a
Bodhisatta, a seeker of enlightenment. With the Dlgha it shares
the miraculous story of his conception and birth (MN 123), but
its version of his great renunciation has been stripped to bare
essentials and related in the stark terms of existential realism. In
his youth, having seen through the sensual delights to which his
princely status entitled him (MN 75.10), the Bodhisatta decided
that it was futile to pursue things subject like himself to ageing
and death and thus, with his parents weeping, he left the home
life and went in search of the ageless and deathless, Nibbana
(MN 26.13). MN 26 tells of his discipleship under two accom-
plished meditation teachers of the day, his mastery of their sys-
tems, and his consequent disillusionment. MN 12 and MN 36
describe his ascetic practices during his six hard years of striv-
ing, a path he pursued almost to the point of death. MN 26 and
MN 36 both relate in lean and unembellished terms his attain-
ment of enlightenment, which they view from different angles,
while MN 26 takes us past the enlightenment to the decision to
teach and the instruction of his first disciples. From that point
on connected biography breaks off in the Majjhima and can only
be reconstructed partially and hypothetically.

Again, despite the absence of any systematic account, the
Majjhima offers a sufficient number of cameo portraits of the


Introduction 23


Buddha for us to obtain, with the aid of information provided
by other sources, a fairly satisfactory picture of his daily activi-
ties and annual routine during the forty-five years of his min-
istry. A commentarial text shows the Buddha's daily schedule
as having been divided between periods of instructing the
bhikkhus, giving discourses to the laity, and secluded medita-
tion, during which he usually dwelt either in the "abode of
voidness" (MN 121.3, MN 122.6) or in the attainment of great
compassion. The day's single meal was always taken in the
forenoon, either received by invitation or collected on alms-
round, and his sleep was restricted to a few hours per night,
except in the summer, when he rested briefly during the middle
of the day (MN 36.46). The annual routine was determined by
the Indian climate, which divided the year into three seasons -
a cold season from November through February, a hot season
from March through June, and a rainy season from July
through October. As was customary among the ascetics of
ancient India, the Buddha and his monastic community would
remain at a fixed residence during the rainy season, when tor-
rential rains and swollen rivers made travel almost impossible.
During the rest of the year he would wander through the
Ganges Valley expounding his teachings to all who were pre-
pared to listen.

The Buddha's main seats of residence for the rains retreat
(vassa) were located at SavatthI in the state of Kosala and Raja-
gaha in the state of Magadha. At SavatthI he would usually stay
at Jeta's Grove, a park offered to him by the wealthy merchant
Anathapindika, and accordingly a great number of Majjhima
discourses are recorded as having been given there.
Occasionally at SavatthI he would reside instead at the Eastern
Park, offered by the devout lay-woman Visakha, also known as
"Migara's mother." In Rajagaha he often stayed at the Bamboo
Grove, offered by the king of Magadha, Seniya Bimbisara, or for
greater seclusion, on Vulture Peak outside the city. His wander-
ings, during which he was usually accompanied by a large ret-
inue of bhikkhus, ranged from the Angan country (close to
modern West Bengal) to the Himalayan foothills and the Kuru
country (modem Delhi). Occasionally, when he saw that a spe-
cial case required his individual attention, he would leave the
Sangha and travel alone (see MN 75, MN 86, MN 140).



24 The Majjhima Nikaya


Although the Canon is precise and reliable in affording such
details, for the early Buddhist community interest focuses upon
the Buddha not so much in his concrete historical particularity
as in his archetypal significance. Whereas outsiders might view
him as merely one among the many spiritual teachers of the
day - as "the recluse Gotama" - to his disciples "he is vision, he
is knowledge, he is the Dhamma, he is the holy one,... the giver
of the Deathless, the lord of the Dhamma, the Tathagata"
(MN 18.12). The last term in this series is the epithet the Buddha
uses most often when referring to himself and it underscores his
significance as the Great Arrival who brings to fulfilment a cos-
mic, repetitive pattern of events. The Pali commentators explain
the word as meaning "thus come" (tatha agata) and "thus gone"
(tatha gata), that is, the one who comes into our midst bearing the
message of deathlessness to which he has gone by his own prac-
tice of the path. As the Tathagata he possesses the ten powers of
knowledge and the four intrepidities, which enable him to roar
his "lion's roar" in the assemblies (MN 12.9-20). He is not merely
a wise sage or a benevolent moralist but the latest in the line of
Fully Enlightened Ones, each of whom arises singly in an age of
spiritual darkness, discovers the deepest truths about the nature
of existence, and establishes a Dispensation ( sasana ) through
which the path to deliverance again becomes accessible to the
world. Even those of his disciples who have attained unsurpass-
able vision, practice, and deliverance still honour and venerate
the Tathagata as one who, enlightened himself, teaches others
for the sake of their enlightenment (MN 35.26). Looking back at
him following his demise, the first generation of monks could
say: "The Blessed One was the arouser of the unarisen path, the
producer of the unproduced path, the declarer of the undeclared
path; he was the knower of the path, the finder of the path, the
one skilled in the path," which is followed by and attained to
afterwards by his disciples (MN 108.5).

THE FOUR NOBLE TRUTHS

The Buddha's teaching is called the Dhamma, a word that can
signify both the truth transmitted by the teaching and the con-
ceptual-verbal medium by which that truth is expressed in order
that it can be communicated and made comprehensible. The


Introduction 25


Dhamma is not a body of immutable dogmas or a system of
speculative thought. It is essentially a means, a raft for crossing
over from the "near shore" of ignorance, craving, and suffering
to the "far shore" of transcendental peace and freedom
(MN 22.13). Because his aim in setting forth his teaching is a
pragmatic one - deliverance from suffering - the Buddha can
dismiss the whole gamut of metaphysical speculation as a futile
endeavour. Those committed to it he compares to a man struck
by a poisoned arrow who refuses the surgeon's help until he
knows the details about his assailant and his weaponry
(MN 63.5). Being struck by the arrow of craving, afflicted by
ageing and death, humanity is in urgent need of help. The rem-
edy the Buddha brings as the surgeon for the world (MN 105.27)
is the Dhamma, which discloses both the truth of our existential
plight and the means by which we can heal our wounds.

The Dhamma that the Buddha discovered and taught consists
at its core in Four Noble Truths:

• the noble truth of suffering (dukkha)

• the noble truth of the origin of suffering ( dukkhasamudaya )

• the noble truth of the cessation of suffering ( dukkhanirodha )

• the noble truth of the way leading to the cessation of suffer-
ing (dukkhanirodhagamini patipada)

It is these four truths that the Buddha awakened to on the night
of his enlightenment (MN 4.31, MN 36.42), made known to the
world when he set rolling the matchless Wheel of the Dhamma
at Benares (MN 141.2), and held aloft through the forty-five
years of his ministry as "the teaching special to the Buddhas"
(MN 56.18). In the Majjhima Nikaya the Four Noble Truths are
expounded concisely at MN 9.14-18 and in detail in MN 141,
while in MN 28 the venerable Sariputta develops an original
exposition of the truths unique to that sutta. Yet, though they
may be brought forth explicitly only on occasion, the Four
Noble Truths structure the entire teaching of the Buddha, con-
taining its many other principles just as the elephant's footprint
contains the footprints of all other animals (MN 28.2).

The pivotal notion around which the truths revolve is that of
dukkha, translated here as "suffering." The Pali word originally
meant simply pain and suffering, a meaning it retains in the
texts when it is used as a quality of feeling: in these cases it has


26 The Majjhima Nikaya


been rendered as "pain" or "painful." As the first noble truth,
however, dukkha has a far wider significance, reflective of a
comprehensive philosophical vision. While it draws its affective
colouring from its connection with pain and suffering, and cer-
tainly includes these, it points beyond such restrictive meanings
to the inherent unsatisfactoriness of everything conditioned.
This unsatisfactoriness of the conditioned is due to its imperma-
nence, its vulnerability to pain, and its inability to provide com-
plete and lasting satisfaction.

The notion of impermanence ( aniccata ) forms the bedrock for
the Buddha's teaching, having been the initial insight that
impelled the Bodhisatta to leave the palace in search of a path to
enlightenment. Impermanence, in the Buddhist view, comprises
the totality of conditioned existence, ranging in scale from the
cosmic to the microscopic. At the far end of the spectrum the
Buddha's vision reveals a universe of immense dimensions
evolving and disintegrating in repetitive cycles throughout
beginningless time - "many aeons of world-contraction, many
aeons of world-expansion, many aeons of world-contraction and
expansion" (MN 4.27). In the middle range the mark of imper-
manence comes to manifestation in our inescapable mortality,
our condition of being bound to ageing, sickness, and death
(MN 26.5), of possessing a body that is subject "to being worn
and rubbed away, to dissolution and disintegration" (MN 74.9).
And at the close end of the spectrum, the Buddha's teaching dis-
closes the radical impermanence uncovered only by sustained
attention to experience in its living immediacy: the fact that all
the constituents of our being, bodily and mental, are in constant
process, arising and passing away in rapid succession from
moment to moment without any persistent underlying sub-
stance. In the very act of observation they are undergoing
"destruction, vanishing, fading away, and ceasing" (MN 74.11).

This characteristic of impermanence that marks everything
conditioned leads directly to the recognition of the universality
of dukkha or suffering. The Buddha underscores' this all-
pervasive aspect of dukkha when, in his explanation of the first
noble truth, he says, "In short, the five aggregates affected by
clinging are suffering." The five aggregates affected by clinging
(pane 'upadanakkhandha). are a classificatory scheme that the
Buddha had devised for demonstrating the composite nature of


Introduction 27


personality. The scheme comprises every possible type of condi-
tioned state, which it distributes into five categories - material
form, feeling, perception, mental formations, and consciousness.
The aggregate of material form (rupa) includes the physical body
with its sense faculties as well as external material objects. The
aggregate of feeling ( vedana ) is the affective element in experi-
ence, either pleasant, painful, or neutral. Perception ( sanna ), the
third aggregate, is the factor responsible for noting the qualities
of things and also accounts for recognition and memory. The
formations aggregate ( sankhara ) is an umbrella term that
includes all volitional, emotive, and intellective aspects of men-
tal life. And consciousness ( vinnam ), the fifth aggregate, is the
basic awareness of an object indispensable to all cognition. As
the venerable Sariputta shows in his masterly analysis of the
first noble truth, representatives of all five aggregates are pre-
sent on every occasion of experience, arising in connection with
each of the six sense faculties and their objects (MN 28.28).

The Buddha's statement that the five aggregates are dukkha
thus reveals that the very things we identify with and hold to as
the basis for happiness, rightly seen, are the basis for the suffer-
ing that we dread. Even when we feel ourselves comfortable
and secure, the instability of the aggregates is itself a source of
oppression and keeps us perpetually exposed to suffering in its
more blatant forms. The whole situation becomes multiplied
further to dimensions beyond calculation when we take into
account the Buddha's disclosure of the fact of rebirth. All beings
in whom ignorance and craving remain present wander on in
the cycle of repeated existence, samsara, in which each turn
brings them the suffering of new birth, ageing, illness, and
death. All states of existence within samsara, being necessarily
transitory and subject to change, are incapable of providing last-
ing security. Life in any world is unstable, it is swept away, it
has no shelter and protector, nothing of its own (MN 82.36).

THE TEACHING OF NON-SELF

Inextricably tied up with impermanence and suffering is a third
principle intrinsic to all phenomena of existence. This is the
characteristic of non-self ( anatta ), and the three together are
called the three marks or characteristics ( tilakkhana ). The Buddha


28 The Majjhima Nikaya


teaches, contrary to our most cherished beliefs, that our person-
ality - the five aggregates - cannot be identified as self, as an
enduring and substantial ground of personal identity. The notion
of self has only a conventional validity, as a convenient short-
hand device for denoting a composite insubstantial situation. It
does not signify any ultimate immutable entity subsisting at the
core of our being. The bodily and mental factors are transitory
phenomena, constantly arising and passing away, processes cre-
ating the appearance of selfhood through their causal continuity
and interdependent functioning. Nor does the Buddha posit a
self outside and beyond the five aggregates. The notion of self-
hood, treated as an ultimate, he regards as a product of igno-
rance, and all the diverse attempts to substantiate this notion by
identifying it with some aspect of the personality he describes as
"clinging to a doctrine of self."

In several suttas in the Majjhima Nikaya, the Buddha gives
forceful expression to his repudiation of views of self. In
MN 102 he undertakes a far-reaching survey of the various
propositions put forth about the self, declaring them all to be
"conditioned and gross." In MN 2.8 six views of self are branded
as "the thicket of views, the wilderness of views, the contortion
of views, the vacillation of views, the fetter of views." In MN 11
he compares his teaching point by point with those of other
recluses and brahmins and shows that beneath their apparent
similarities, they finally diverge on just this one crucial point -
the rejection of views of self - which undermines the agree-
ments. MN 22 offers a series of arguments against the view, of
self, culminating in the Buddha's declaration that he does not see
any doctrine of self that would not lead to sorrow, lamentation,
pain, grief, and despair. In his map of the steps to liberation,
personality view ( sakkayaditthi ), the positing of a self in relation
to the five aggregates, is held to be the first fetter to be broken
with the arising of the "vision of the Dhamma."

The principle of non-self is shown in the suttas to follow logi-
cally from the two marks of impermanence and suffering. The
standard formula states that what is impermanent is pain or suf-
fering, and what is impermanent, suffering, and subject to
change cannot be regarded as mine, I, or self (MN 22.26,
MN 35.20, etc.). Other passages highlight the relationship
among the three characteristics from different angles. MN 28


Introduction 29


points out that when the external physical elements - earth,
water, fire, and air - vast as they are, are periodically destroyed
in cosmic cataclysms, there can be no considering this transitory
body as self. MN 148 demonstrates by a reductio ad absurdum
argument that impermanence implies non-self: when all the fac-
tors of being are clearly subject to rise and fall, to identify any-
thing among them with self is to be left with the untenable thesis
that self is subject to rise and fall. MN 35.19 connects the mark of
non-self with that of dukkha by arguing that because we cannot
bend the five aggregates to our will, they cannot be taken as
mine, I, or self.

THE ORIGIN AND CESSATION OF SUFFERING

The second of the Four Noble Truths makes known the origin or
cause of suffering, which the Buddha identifies as craving
(tanha) in its three aspects: craving for sensual pleasures; craving
for being, that is, for continued existence; and craving for non-
being, that is, for personal annihilation. The third truth states the
converse of the second truth, that with the elimination of crav-
ing the suffering that originates from it will cease without
remainder.

The Buddha's discovery of the causal link between craving
and suffering accounts for the apparent "pessimistic" streak that
emerges in several suttas of the Majjhima Nikaya: in MN 13
with its disquisition on the dangers in sensual pleasures, form,
and feeling; in MN 10 and MN 119 with their cemetery medita-
tions; in MN 22, MN 54, and MN 75 with their shocking similes
for sensual pleasures. Such teachings are part of the Buddha's
tactical approach to guiding his disciples to liberation. By its
own inherent nature craving springs up and thrives wherever it
finds something that appears pleasant and delightful. It prolifer-
ates through mistaken perception - the perception of sense
objects as enjoyable - and thus to break the grip of craving on
the mind, exhortation is often not enough. The Buddha must
make people see that the things they yearn for and frantically
pursue are really suffering, and he does this by exposing the
dangers concealed beneath their sweet and charming exteriors.

Although the second and third noble truths have an immedi-
ate psychological validity, they also have a deeper aspect


30 The Majjhima Nikaya


brought to light in the suttas. The middle two truths as stated in
the general formulation of the Four Noble Truths are actually
telescoped versions of a longer formulation that discloses the
origin and cessation of bondage in samsara. The doctrine in
which this expanded version of the two truths is set forth is
called paticca samuppada, dependent origination. In its fullest
statement the doctrine spells out the origination and cessation of
suffering in terms of twelve factors connected together in eleven
propositions. This formulation, laid down schematically, will be
found at MN 38.17 in its order of arising and at MN 38.20 in its
order of ceasing. MN 115.11 includes both sequences together
preceded by a statement of the general principle of conditionality
that underlies the applied doctrine. A more elaborate version
giving a factorial analysis of each term in the series is presented
at MN 9.21-66, and a version exemplified in the course of an
individual life at MN 38.26-40. Condensed versions are also
found, notably at MN 1.171, MN 11.16, and MN 75.24-25. The
venerable Sariputta quotes the Buddha as saying that one who
sees dependent origination sees the Dhamma and one who sees
the Dhamma sees dependent origination (MN 28.28).

According to the usual interpretation, the series of twelve fac-
tors extends over three lives and divides into causal and resul-
tant phases. The gist of it can be briefly explained as follows.
Because of ignorance ( avijja ) - defined as non-knowledge of the
Four Noble Truths - a person engages in volitional actions or
kamma, which may be bodily, verbal, or mental, wholesome or
unwholesome. These kammic actions are the formations
(s ankhara), and they ripen in states of consciousness (vinhana) -
first as the rebirth-consciousness at the moment of conception
and thereafter as the passive states of consciousness resulting
from kamma that matures in the course of a lifetime. Along with
consciousness there arises mentality-materiality ( namarupa ), the
psychophysical organism, which is equipped with the sixfold
base ( salayatana ), the five physical sense faculties and mind as
the faculty of the higher cognitive functions. Via the sense facul-
ties contact ( phassa ) takes place between consciousness and its
objects, and contact conditions feeling ( vedana ). The links from
consciousness through feeling are the products of past kamma,
of the causal phase represented by ignorance and formations.
With the next link the kammically active phase of the present


Introduction 31


life begins, productive of a new existence in the future.
Conditioned by feeling, craving ( tanha ) arises, this being the sec-
ond noble truth. When craving intensifies it gives rise to cling-
ing ( upadana ), through which one again engages in volitional
actions pregnant with a renewal of existence ( bhava ). The new
existence begins with birth (jati ), which inevitably leads to ageing
and death ( jaramarana ).

The teaching of dependent origination also shows how the
round of existence can be broken. With the arising of true
knowledge, full penetration of the Four Noble Truths, ignorance
is eradicated. Consequently the mind no longer indulges in
craving and clinging, action loses its potential to generate
rebirth, and deprived thus of its fuel, the round comes to an end.
This marks the goal of the teaching signalled.by the third noble
truth, the cessation of suffering.

NIBBANA

The state that supervenes when ignorance and craving have
been uprooted is called Nibbana (Sanskrit, Nirvana), and no con-
ception in the Buddha's teaching has proved so refractory to
conceptual pinning down as this one. In a way such elusiveness
is only to be expected, since Nibbana is described precisely as
"profound, hard to see and hard to understand,... unattainable
by mere reasoning" (MN 26.19). Yet in this same passage the
Buddha also says that Nibbana is to be experienced by the wise
and in the suttas he gives enough indications of its nature to
convey some idea of its desirability.

The Pali Canon offers sufficient evidence to dispense with the
opinion of some interpreters that Nibbana is' sheer annihilation;
even the more sophisticated view that Nibbana is merely the
destruction of defilements and the extinction of existence cannot
stand up under scrutiny. Probably the most compelling testi-
mony against that view is the well-known passage from the
Udana that declares with reference to Nibbana that "there is an
unborn, unbecome, unmade, unconditioned," the existence of
which makes possible "escape from the born, become, made,
and conditioned" (Ud 8:3/80). The Majjhima Nikaya characteris-
es Nibbana in similar ways. It is "the unborn, unageing, unail-
ing, deathless, sorrowless, undefiled supreme security from


32 The Majjhima Nikaya


bondage," which the Buddha attained to on the night of his
enlightenment (MN 26.18). Its pre-eminent reality is affirmed by
the Buddha when he calls Nibbana the supreme foundation of
truth, whose nature is undeceptive and which ranks as the
supreme noble truth (MN 140.26). Nibbana cannot be perceived
by those who live in lust and hate, but it can be seen with the
arising of spiritual vision, and by fixing the mind upon it in the
depths of meditation, the disciple can attain the destruction of
the taints (MN 26.19, MN 75.24, MN 64.9).

The Buddha does not devote many words to a philosophical
definition of Nibbana. One reason is that Nibbana, being uncon-
ditioned, transcendent, and supramundane, does not easily lend i
itself to definition in terms of concepts that are inescapably tied
to the conditioned, manifest, and mundane. Another is that the j
Buddha's objective is the practical one of leading beings to I
release from suffering, and thus his principal approach to the j
characterisation of Nibbana is to inspire the incentive to attain it
and to show what must be done to accomplish this. To show
Nibbana as desirable, as the aim of striving, he describes it as
the highest bliss, as the supreme state of sublime peace, as the
ageless, deathless, and sorrowless, as the supreme security from
bondage. To show what must be done to attain Nibbana, to indi-
cate that the goal implies a definite task, he describes it as the
stilling of all formations, the relinquishing of all attachments, t
the destruction of craving, dispassion (MN 26.19). Above all, ;
Nibbana is the cessation of suffering, and for those who seek an
end to suffering such a designation is enough to beckon them
towards the path. j

THE WAY TO THE CESSATION OF SUFFERING j

The fourth noble truth completes the pattern established by
the first three truths by revealing the means to eliminate crav-
ing and thereby bring an end to suffering. This truth teaches
the "Middle Way" discovered by the Buddha, the Noble
Eightfold Path:

1. right view ( samma ditthi)

2. right intention ( samma sankappa) I

3. right speech ( samma vaca) j


Introduction 33


4. right action (samma kammanta)

5. right livelihood ( samma ajiva)

6. right effort ( samma vayama )

7. right mindfulness ( samma sati)

8. right concentration ( samma samadhi )

Mentioned countless times throughout the Majjhima Nika y a,
the Noble Eightfold Path is explained in detail in two full suttas.
MN 141 gives a factorial analysis of the eight components of the
path using the definitions that are standard in the Pali Canon;
MN 117 expounds the path from a different angle under the
rubric of "noble right concentration with its supports and its
requisites." The Buddha there makes the important distinction
between the mundane and supramundane stages of the path,
defines the first five factors for both stages, and shows how the
path factors function in unison in the common task of providing
an outlet from suffering. Other suttas explore in greater detail
individual components of the path. Thus MN 9 provides an in-
depth exposition of right view, MN 10 of right mindfulness,
MN 19 of right intention. MN 44.11 explains that the eight fac-
tors can be incorporated into three " aggregates " of training.
Right speech, right action, and right livelihood make up the
aggregate of virtue or moral discipline (sila)} right effort, right
mindfulness, and right concentration make up the aggregate of
concentration (samadhi)} and right view and right intention make
up the aggregate of understanding or wisdom ( pahha ). This
threefold sequence in turn serves as the basic outline for the
gradual training, to be discussed later.

In the Pali Canon the practices conducing to Nibbana are often
elaborated into a more complex set comprising seven groups
of intersecting factors. The later tradition designates them the
thirty-seven requisites of enlightenment ( bodhipakkhiya dhamma),
but the Buddha himself simply speaks of them without a collec-
tive name as "the things that I have taught you after directly
knowing them" (MN 103.3, MN 104.5). Towards the end of his
life he stressed to the Sangha that the long duration of his teach-
ing in the world depends upon the accurate preservation of
these factors and their being practised by his followers in har-
mony, free from contention.


34 The Majjhima Nikaya


The constituents of this set are as follows:

• the four foundations of mindfulness ( satipatthana )

• the four right kinds of striving ( sammappadhana )

• the four bases for spiritual power ( iddhipada )

• the five faculties ( indriya )

• the five powers ( bala )

• the seven enlightenment factors ( bojjhanga )

• the Noble Eightfold Path (ariya atthangika magga)

Each group is defined in full at MN 77.15-21. As examination
will show, most of these groups are simply subdivisions or
rearrangements of factors of the eightfold path made to high-
light different aspects of the practice. Thus, for example, the four
foundations of mindfulness are an elaboration of right mindful-
ness; the four right kinds of striving, an elaboration of right
effort. The development of the groups is therefore integral and
not sequential. MN 118, for example, shows how the practice of
the four foundations of mindfulness fulfils the development of
the seven enlightenment factors, and MN 149.10 states that one
engaged in insight meditation on the senses brings to maturity
all thirty-seven requisites of enlightenment.

Factorial analysis of the thirty-seven requisites of enlighten-
ment brings to light the central importance of four factors
among them - energy, mindfulness, concentration, and wisdom.
From this a clear picture of the essential practice can be
sketched. One begins with a conceptual understanding of the
Dhamma and an intention to' achieve the goal, the first two path
factors. Then, out of faith, one accepts the moral discipline regu-
lating speech, action, and livelihood. With virtue as a basis one
energetically applies the mind to cultivating the four foundations
of mindfulness. As mindfulness matures it issues in deepened
concentration, and the concentrated mind, by investigation,
arrives at wisdom, a penetrative understanding of the principles
originally grasped only conceptually.

THE GRADUAL TRAINING

In the Majjhima Nikaya the Buddha often expounds the practice
of the path as a gradual training ( anupubbasikkha ), which unfolds
in stages from the first step to the final goal. This gradual training


Introduction 35


is a finer subdivision of the threefold division of the path into
virtue, concentration, and wisdom. Invariably in the suttas the
sequence on the gradual training is shown to start with the going
forth into homelessness and the adoption of the lifestyle of a
bhikkhu, a Buddhist monk. This immediately calls attention to
the importance of the monastic life in the Buddha's Dispensation.
In principle the entire practice of the Noble Eightfold Path is
open to people from any mode of life, monastic or lay, and the
Buddha confirms that many among his lay followers were
accomplished in the Dhamma and had attained the first three of
the four supramundane stages (MN 68.18-23; MN 73.9-22; the
Theravadin position is that lay followers can also attain the
fourth stage, arahantship, but having done so they immediately
seek the going forth or pass away). However, the fact remains
that the household life inevitably tends to impede the single-
hearted quest for deliverance by fostering a multitude of worldly
concerns and personal attachments. Hence the Buddha himself
went forth into homelessness as the preliminary step in his own
noble quest, and after his enlightenment he established the
Sangha, the order of bhikkhus and bhikkhunls, as the resort for
those who wish to devote themselves fully to the practice of his
teaching undeflected by the cares of household life.

The main paradigm for the gradual training found in the
Majjhima Nikaya is that laid out in MN 27 and MN 51; alterna-
tive versions are found at MN 38, MN 39, MN 53, MN 107, and
MN 125, and some of the more important variations will be
briefly noted. The sequence opens with the appearance of a
Tathagata in the world and his exposition of the Dhamma, hear-
ing which the disciple acquires faith and follows the Teacher
into homelessness. Having gone forth, he undertakes and
observes the rules of discipline that promote the purification of
conduct and livelihood. The next three steps - contentment,
restraint of the sense faculties, and mindfulness and full aware-
ness - are intended to internalise the process of purification and
thereby bridge the transition from virtue to concentration.
Alternative versions (MN 39, MN 53, MN 107, MN 125) insert
two additional steps here, moderation in eating and devotion to
wakefulness.

The direct training in concentration comes to prominence in
the section on the abandonment of the five hindrances. The five


36 The Majjhima Nikaya


hindrances - sensual desire, ill will, sloth and torpor, restless-
ness and remorse, and doubt - are the primary obstacles to med-
itative development and their removal is therefore essential for
the mind to be brought to a state of calm and unification. In the
sequence on the gradual training the overcoming of the hin-
drances is treated only schematically; other parts of the Canon
provide more practical instruction, amplified still more in the
commentaries. The passage on the hindrances is graced in
MN 39 by a series of similes illustrating the contrast between the
bondage imposed by the hindrances and the joyful sense of free-
dom that is won when they are abandoned.

The next stage in the sequence describes the attainment of the
jhanas, profound states of concentration in which the mind
becomes fully absorbed in its object. The Buddha enumerates
four jhanas, named simply after their numerical position in the
series, each more refined and elevated than its predecessor. The
jhanas are always described by the same formulas, which in sev-
eral suttas (MN 39, MN 77, MN 119) are augmented by similes
of great beauty. Although in the Theravada tradition the jhanas
are not regarded as indispensable to the attainment of enlighten-
ment, the Buddha invariably includes them in the full gradual
training because of the contribution they make to the intrinsic
perfection of the path and because the deep concentration they
induce provides a solid base for the cultivation of insight. While
still mundane the jhanas are the "footsteps of the Tathagata"
(MN 27.19-22) and foretokens of the bliss of Nibbana that lies at
the training's end.

From the fourth jhana three alternative lines of further devel-
opment become possible. In a number of passages outside the
sequence on the gradual training (MN 8, MN 25, MN 26, MN 66,
etc.) the Buddha mentions four meditative states that continue
the mental unification established by the jhanas. These states,
described as "the liberations that are peaceful and immaterial,"
are, like the jhanas, also mundane. Distinguished from the jhanas
by their transcendence of the subtle mental image that forms the
object in the jhanas, they are named after their own exalted
objects: the base of infinite space, the base of infinite conscious-
ness, the base of nothingness, and the base of neither-perception-
nor-non-perception. In the Pali commentaries these states came
to be called the immaterial or formless jhanas (arupaj jhana).


Introduction 37


A second line of development disclosed by the suttas is the
acquisition of supernormal knowledge. The Buddha frequently
mentions six types as a group, which come to be called the six
kinds of direct knowledge ( chalabhinna ; the expression does not
occur in the Majjhima). The last of these, the knowledge of the
destruction of the taints, is supramundane and thus properly
belongs to the third line of development. But the other five are
all mundane, products of the extraordinarily powerful degree of
mental concentration achieved in the fourth jhana: the super-
normal powers, the divine ear, the ability to read the minds of
others, the recollection of past lives, and the divine eye (MN 6,
MN 73, MN 77, MN 108).

The jhanas and the mundane types of direct knowledge by
themselves do not issue in enlightenment and liberation. As
lofty and peaceful as these attainments are, they can only sup-
press the defilements that sustain the round of rebirths but cannot
eradicate them. To uproot the defilements at the most fundamen-
tal level, and thereby yield the fruits of enlightenment and
deliverance, the meditative process must be redirected along a
third line of development, one which does not necessarily pre-
suppose the former two. This is the contemplation of "things as
they actually are," which results in increasingly deeper insights
into the nature of existence and culminates in the final goal, the
attainment of arahantship.

This line of development is the one the Buddha pursues in the
sequence on the gradual training, though he precedes it by
descriptions of two of the direct knowledges, the recollection of
past lives and the divine eye. The three together, which figured
prominently in the Buddha's own enlightenment (MN 4.27-30),
are collectively called the three true knowledges ( tevijja ).
Although the first two among these are not essential to the reali-
sation of arahantship, we may assume that the Buddha includes
them here because they reveal the truly vast and profound
dimensions of suffering in samsara and thereby prepare the
mind for the penetration of the Four Noble Truths, in which that
^suffering is diagnosed and surmounted.

The process of contemplation by which the meditator devel-
ops insight is not explicitly shown as such in the sequence on
the gradual training. It is only implied by the exhibiting of its
final fruit, here called the knowledge of the destruction of the


38 The Majjhima Nikaya


taints. The asavas or taints are a classification of defilements con-
sidered in their role of sustaining the samsaric round. The
commentaries derive the word from a root su meaning "to
flow." Scholars differ as to whether the flow implied by the pre-
fix a is inward or outward; hence some have rendered it as
"influxes" or "influences," others as "outflows" or "effluents."
A stock passage in the suttas indicates the term's real signifi-
cance independently of etymology when it describes the asavas
as states "that defile, bring renewal of being, give trouble, ripen
in suffering, and lead to future birth, ageing, and death"
(MN 36.47, etc.). Thus other translators, bypassing the literal
meaning, have rendered it "cankers," "corruptions," or "taints,"
the latter being the choice of Ven. Nanamoli. The three taints
mentioned in the suttas are virtual synonyms for craving for
sensual pleasures, craving for being, and the ignorance that
appears at the head of the formula for dependent origination.
When the disciple's mind has been liberated from the taints by
the completion of the path of arahantship, he reviews his newly
won freedom and roars his lion's roar: "Birth is destroyed, the
holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done,
there is no more coming to any state of being."

APPROACHES TO MEDITATION

The methods of meditation taught by the Buddha in the Pali
Canon fall into two broad systems. One is the development of
serenity ( samatha ), which 'aims at concentration ( samadhi ); the
other is the development of insight ( vipassana ), which aims at
understanding or wisdom ( pahha ). In the Buddha's system of
mental training the role of serenity is subordinated to that of
insight because the latter is the crucial instrument needed to
uproot the ignorance at the bottom of samsaric bondage. The
attainments possible through serenity meditation were known
to Indian contemplatives long before the advent of the Buddha.
The Buddha himself mastered the two highest stages under his
early teachers but found that they only led to higher planes of
rebirth, not to genuine enlightenment (MN 26.15-16). However,
because the unification of mind induced by the practice of con-
centration contributes to clear understanding, the Buddha incor-
porated the techniques of serenity meditation and the resulting


Introduction 39


levels of absorption into his own system, treating them as a
foundation and preparation for insight and as a "pleasant abid-
ing here and now."

The attainments reached by the practice of serenity meditation
are, as mentioned in the preceding section, the eight absorptions
- the four jhanas and the four immaterial states - each of which
serves as the basis for the next. Strangely, the suttas do not
explicitly prescribe specific meditation subjects as the means for
attaining the jhanas, but the commentarial literature such, as the
Visuddhimagga enables us to make the connections. Among the
meditation topics enumerated in the suttas, eight of the ten
kasinas (MN 77.24) are recognised as suitable for attaining all four
jhanas, the last two being the respective supports for the first two
immaterial attainments. The eight bases for transcendence seem
to be a more finely differentiated treatment of meditation on the
colour kasinas, as are the first three of the eight liberations
(MN 77.22-23). Mindfulness of breathing, to which the Buddha
devotes an entire sutta (MN 118), provides an ever accessible
meditation subject that can be pursued through all four jhanas
and also used to develop insight. Another method for attaining
the jhanas mentioned in the suttas is the four divine abodes
(brahmavihara) - boundless loving-kindness, compassion, appre-
ciative joy (i.e., gladness at others' success), and equanimity
(MN 7, MN 40, etc.). Tradition holds the first three to be capable
of leading to the three lower jhanas, the last of inducing the
fourth jhana. The immaterial attainments are to be reached by
fixing the mind on the specific object of each attainment - infinite
space, infinite consciousness, nothingness, and the state that can
only be described as neither percipient nor as non-percipient.

Whereas in serenity meditation the meditator attempts to
focus upon a single uniform object abstracted from actual expe-
rience, in insight meditation the endeavour is made to contem-
plate, from a position of detached observation, the ever-shifting
flux of experience itself in order to penetrate through to the
essential nature of bodily and mental phenomena. The Buddha
% teaches that the craving and clinging that hold us in bondage are
sustained by a network of "conceivings" ( mannita ) - deluded
views, conceits, and suppositions that the mind fabricates by an
internal process of mental commentary or "proliferation"
ipapanca) and then projects out upon the world, taking them to


40 The Majjhima Nikaya


possess objective validity. The task of insight meditation is to
sever our attachments by enabling us to pierce through this net
of conceptual projections in order to see things as they really are.

To see things as they really are means to see them in terms of
the three characteristics - as impermanent, as painful or suffer-
ing, and as not self. Since the three characteristics are closely
interlinked, any one of them can be made the main portal for
entering the domain of insight, but the Buddha's usual
approach is to show all three together - impermanence implying
suffering and the two in conjunction implying the absence of
self. When the noble disciple sees all the factors of being as
stamped with these three marks, he no longer identifies with
them, no longer appropriates them by taking them to be mine, I,
or self. Seeing thus, he becomes disenchanted with all forma-
tions. When he becomes disenchanted, his lust and attachment
fade away and his mind is liberated from the taints.

Instructions for the development of insight in the Majjhima
Nikaya, though concise, are many and diverse. The single most
important lesson on the practice conducing to insight is the
Satipatthana Sutta, the Discourse on the Foundations of
Mindfulness (MN 10; also found in the Digha Nikaya with an
amplified section on the Four Noble Truths). The sutta sets forth
a comprehensive system called satipatthana designed to train the
mind to see with microscopic precision the true nature of the
body, feelings, states of mind, and mental objects. The system is
sometimes taken to be the .paradigm for the practice of "bare
insight" - the direct contemplation of mental and bodily phe-
nomena without a prior foundation of jhana - and, while several
exercises described in the sutta can also lead to the jhanas, the
arousing of insight is clearly the intent of the method.

Other suttas in the Majjhima Nikaya describe approaches to
developing insight that either elaborate upon the satipatthana
contemplations or reach them from a different starting point.
Thus MN 1 18 shows how the practice of mindfulness of breath-
ing fulfils all four foundations of mindfulness, not the first alone
as shown in MN 10. Several suttas - MN 28, MN 62, MN 140 -
present more detailed instructions on the contemplation of the
elements. MN 37, MN 74, and MN 140 contain illuminating pas-
sages on the contemplation of feeling. In some suttas the
Buddha uses the five aggregates as the groundwork for insight


Introduction 41


contemplation (e.g., MN 22, MN 109); in some, the six sense
bases (e.g., MN 137, MN 148, MN 149); in some, the two com-
bined (MN 147). MN 112 has sections dealing with insight based
on the five aggregates, the six elements, and the six sense bases,
and as resulting from the gradual training. MN 52 and MN 64
show that insight can also be aroused with the jhanas, the imma-
terial attainments, and the divine abodes as its objects: the disci-
ple enters any of these states and contemplates its constituent
factors as subject to the three characteristics.

Several sequences of meditative states mentioned in the
Majjhima culminate in an attainment called the cessation of per-
ception and feeling {sannavedayitanirodha). Although this state
always follows the last immaterial attainment, it is not, as may be
supposed, merely one higher step in the scale of concentration.
Strictly speaking, the attainment of cessation pertains neither to
serenity nor to insight. It is a state reached by the combined pow-
ers of serenity and insight in which all mental processes are tem-
porarily suspended. The attainment is said to be accessible only
to non-returners and arahants who have also mastered the
jhanas and immaterial states. Detailed canonical discussions of it
are found in MN 43 and MN 44.

THE FOUR PLANES OF LIBERATION

The practice of the Buddhist path evolves in two distinct stages,
a mundane ( lokiya ) or preparatory stage and a supramundane
( lokuttara ) or consummate stage. The mundane path is devel-
oped when the disciple undertakes the gradual training in
virtue, concentration, and wisdom. This reaches its peak in the
practice of insight meditation, which deepens direct experience
of the three characteristics of existence. When the practitioner's
faculties have arrived at an adequate degree of maturity, the
mundane path gives birth to the supramundane path, so called
because it leads directly and infallibly out of ( uttara ) the world
% (/ofca) comprising the three realms of existence to the attainment
of "the deathless element," Nibbana.

Progress along the supramundane path is marked by four
major breakthroughs, each of which ushers the disciple through
two subordinate phases called the path ( magga ) and its fruit
( phala ). The phase of path has the special function of eliminating


42 The Majjhima Nikaya


a determinate number of defilements to which it is directly
opposed, the mental impediments that hold us in bondage to
the round of rebirths. When the work of the path has been com-
pleted, the disciple realises its corresponding fruit, the degree of
liberation made accessible by that particular path. The canonical
formula of homage to the Sangha refers obliquely to these four
planes of liberation - each with its phase of path and fruit -
when it extols the Blessed One's community of noble disciples
as comprising "the four pairs of persons, the eight types of indi-
viduals" (MN 7.7). These four pairs are obtained by taking, for
each stage, the one who has entered upon the way to realisation
of the fruit and the one who has attained the fruit.

In the suttas the Buddha highlights the specific characteristics
of each supramundane stage in two ways: by mentioning the
defilements that are abandoned on each plane and the conse-
quences its attainment bears on the process of rebirth (see, e.g.,
MN 6.11-13, 19; MN 22.42-45, etc.). He handles the elimination of
the defilements by classifying these into a tenfold group called
the ten fetters ( samyojana ). The disciple enters upon the first
supramundane path either as a Dhamma-follower
(dhammanusarin) or as a faith-follower ( saddhdnusarin ); the former
is one in whom wisdom is the dominant faculty, the latter one
who progresses by the impetus of faith. This path, the path of
stream-entry, has the task of eradicating the grossest three fetters:
personality view, i.e., the view of a self among the five aggre-
gates; doubt in the Buddha and his teaching; and adherence to
external rules and observances, either ritualistic or ascetic, in the
belief that they can bring purification. When the disciple realises
the fruit of this path he becomes a stream-enterer ( sotapanna ), who
has entered the "stream" of the Noble Eightfold Path that will
carry him irreversibly to Nibbana. The stream-enterer is bound to
reach final liberation in a maximum of seven more births, which
all occur either in the human world or in the heavenly realms.

The second supramundane path attenuates to a still greater
degree the root defilements of lust, hatred, and delusion, though
without yet eradicating them. On realising the fruit of this path
the disciple becomes a once-retumer ( sakadagamin ), who is due
to return to this world (i.e., the sense-sphere realm) only one
more time and then make an end of suffering. The third path
eradicates the next two fetters, sensual desire and ill will; it


Introduction 43


issues in the fruit of the non-retumer ( anagamin ), who is due to
reappear by spontaneous birth in one of the special celestial
realms called the Pure Abodes, and there attain final Nibbana
without ever returning from that world.

The fourth and last supramundane path is the path of ara-
hantship. This path eradicates the five higher fetters: desire for
rebirth in the fine-material realm and in the immaterial realm,
conceit, restlessness, and ignorance. By realisation of the fruit of
this path the practitioner becomes an arahant, a fully liberated
one, who "here and now enters upon and abides in the deliver-
ance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with
the destruction of the taints." The arahant will be discussed fur-
ther in the next section.

The commentaries (often referred to in the notes to this trans-
lation) develop an interpretation of the paths and fruits based
upon the systemisation of the Buddha's teachings known as the
Abhidhamma. Drawing upon the Abhidhamma depiction of the
mind as a sequence of discrete momentary acts of conscious-
ness, called cittas, the commentaries understand each supra-
mundane path to be a single occasion of consciousness arising at
the climax of a series of insights into the Dhamma. Each of the
four momentary path cittas eliminates its own fixed set of defile-
ments, to be followed immediately by its fruition, which consists
of a string of momentary cittas that enjoy the bliss of Nibbana
made accessible by the breakthrough of the path. Though this
conception of the paths and fruits is regularly employed by the
commentators as an hermeneutical tool for interpreting the sut-
tas, it is not explicitly formulated as such in the old Nikayas and
at times there even appears to be a tension between the two (for
example, in the passage at MN 142.5 describing the four persons
on the path as distinct recipients of offerings).

THE ARAHANT

The ideal figure of the Majjhima Nikaya, as of the Pali Canon as
% whole, is the arahant. The word "arahant" itself derives from a
root meaning "to be worthy." Ven. Nanamoli renders it "accom-
plished" and "Accomplished One" when it is used as an epithet
of the Buddha, probably to be consistent with his practice of
translating all the Buddha's epithets. In its other occurrences he



44 The Majjhima Nikaya


leaves it untranslated. The word seems to have been of pre-
Buddhist coinage but was taken over by the Buddha to desig-
nate the individual who has reached the final fruit of the path.

The suttas employ a stock description of the arahant that
summarises his accomplishments: he is "one with taints
destroyed, who has lived the holy life, done what had to be
done, laid down the burden, reached the true goal, destroyed
the fetters of being, and is completely liberated through final
knowledge" (MN 1.51, etc.). Variant descriptions emphasise dif-
ferent aspects of the arahant's attainment. Thus one sutta offers
a series of metaphorical epithets that the Buddha himself inter-
prets as representing the arahant's abandoning of ignorance,
craving, and conceit, his eradication of fetters, and his freedom
from the round of births (MN 22.30-35). Elsewhere the Buddha
ascribes a different set of epithets to the arahant - several of
brahmanical currency - deriving these terms by imaginative ety-
mology from the arahant's elimination of all evil unwholesome
states (MN 39.22-29).

The Majjhima records differences of type among the arahants,
which are ascribed to the diversity in their faculties. In MN 70
the Buddha introduces a basic distinction between those ara-
hants who are "liberated-in-both-ways" and those who are
"liberated-by-wisdom"; whereas the former are capable of abid-
ing in the immaterial attainments, the latter lack that capacity.
Arahants are further distinguished as those who possess,
besides the knowledge of the destruction of the taints necessary
to all arahants, all three of the true knowledges and all six of the
direct knowledges. In MN 108 the venerable Ananda indicates
that those arahants who possessed the six direct knowledges
were accorded special veneration and authority in the Sangha
following the Buddha's passing away.

Beneath these incidental differences, however, all arahants
alike share the same essential accomplishments - the destruction
of all defilements and the freedom from future rebirths. They
possess three unsurpassable qualities - unsurpassable vision,
unsurpassable practice of the way, and unsurpassable deliver-
ance (MN 35.26). They are endowed with the ten factors of one
beyond training - the eight factors of the Noble Eightfold Path
augmented by right knowledge and right deliverance
(MN 65.34, MN 78.14). They possess the four foundations - the


Introduction 45


foundations of wisdom, of truth, of relinquishment, and of
peace (MN 140.11). And by the eradication of lust, hate, and
delusion all arahants have access to a unique meditative
attainment called the fruition attainment of arahantship,
described as the unshakeable deliverance of mind, the immea-
surable deliverance of mind, the void deliverance of mind, the
deliverance of mind through nothingness, and the signless
deliverance of mind (MN 43.35-37).

KAMMA AND REBIRTH

According to the Buddha's teaching, all beings except the ara-
hants are subject to "renewal of being in the future" ( punabbhava ),
that is, to rebirth. Rebirth, in the Buddhist conception, is not the
transmigration of a self or soul but the continuation of a process,
a flux of becoming in which successive lives are linked together
by causal transmission of influence rather than by substantial
identity. The basic causal pattern underlying the process is that
defined by the teaching of dependent origination (see above,
pp. 30-31), which also demonstrates how rebirth is possible
without a reincarnating self.

The process of rebirth, the Buddha teaches, exhibits a definite
lawfulness essentially ethical in character. This ethical character
is established by the fundamental dynamism that determines
the states into which beings are reborn and the circumstances
they encounter in the course of their lives. That dynamism is
kamma, volitional action of body, speech, and mind. Those
beings who engage in bad actions - actions motivated by the
three unwholesome roots of greed, hate, and delusion - generate
unwholesome kamma that leads them to rebirth into lower
states of existence and, if it ripens in the human world, brings
them pain and misfortune. Those beings who engage in good
actions - actions motivated by the three wholesome roots of
non-greed, non-hate, and non-delusion - generate wholesome
kamma that leads them to higher states of existence and ripens
in the human world as pleasure and good fortune. Because the
deeds a person performs in the course of a single life can be
extremely varied, the type of rebirth that lies ahead of him can
be very unpredictable, as the Buddha shows in MN 136. But
despite this empirical variability, an invariable law governs the


46 The Majjhima Nikaya


direct relationship between types of actions and the types of
results they yield, the basic correlations being sketched by the
Buddha in MN 57 and laid out in greater detail in MN 135.

In several suttas of the Majjhima Nikaya the Buddha refers to
various planes of existence into which rebirth can occur and he
also gives some indication of the types of kamma that lead to
those planes. This cosmological typography is not, from the
Buddhist standpoint, the product of conjecture or fantasy but a
matter directly known to the Buddha through his "Tathagata's
powers of knowledge" (MN 12.36); to some extent the process is
also verifiable by those who gain the divine eye (e.g., MN 39.20).
A brief overview may be given here of the planes of rebirth recog-
nised in Buddhist cosmology and of their kammic antecedents, as
systematised in the developed Theravada tradition.

The Buddhist cosmos is divided into three broad realms - the
sense-sphere realm, the fine-material realm, and the immaterial
realm. Each of these comprises a range of subsidiary planes,
amounting to a total of thirty-one planes of existence.

The sense-sphere realm, so called because sensual desire pre-
dominates there, consists of eleven planes divided into two
groups, the bad destinations and the good destinations. The bad
destinations or "states of deprivation" ( apaya ) are four in num-
ber: the hells, which are states of intense torment as described in
MN 129 and MN 130; the animal kingdom; the sphere of ghosts
( peta ), beings afflicted with incessant hunger and thirst; and the
sphere of titans ( asura ), beings involved in constant combat (not
mentioned as a separate plane in the Majjhima). The courses of
kamma leading to rebirth into these planes are classified into a
set of ten - three of body, four of speech, and three of mind.
These are enumerated briefly at MN 9.4 and explicated in
MN 41. Gradations in the gravity of the evil intentions responsi-
ble for these deeds account for specific differences in the mode
of rebirth resulting from such actions.

The good destinations in the sense-sphere realm are the
human world and the heavenly planes. The latter are sixfold: the
gods under the Four Great Kings; the gods of the Thirty-three
(tavatimsa), who are presided over by Sakka, a Buddhist meta-
morphosis of Indra, depicted as a devotee of the Buddha, faith-
ful, but prone to negligence (MN 37); the Yama gods; the gods of
the Tusita heaven, the abode of the Bodhisatta before his final


Introduction 47


birth (MN 123); the gods who delight in creating; and the gods
who wield power over others' creations. The last is said to be
the abode of Mara, the Tempter in Buddhism, who besides being
a symbol for Desire and Death, is also regarded as a powerful
deity with evil designs, keen to prevent beings from escaping the
net of samsara. The kammic cause for rebirth into the good
destinations of the sense-sphere realm is the practice of the ten
courses of wholesome action, defined at MN 9.8 and in MN 41.

In the fine-material realm the grosser types of matter are
absent and the bliss, power, luminosity, and vitality of its
denizens are far superior to those in the sense-sphere realm. The
fine-material realm consists of sixteen planes, which are the
objective counterparts of the four jhanas. Attainment of the first
jhana leads to rebirth among Brahma's Assembly, the Ministers
of Brahma and the Maha Brahmas, according to whether it is
developed to an inferior, middling, or superior degree. Baka the
Brahma (MN 49) and Brahma Sahampati (MN 26, MN 67) seem
to be residents of the last-named plane. The suttas mention espe-
cially the divine abodes as the path to the company of Brahma
(MN 99.24-27). Attainment of the second jhana in the same three
degrees leads respectively to rebirth among the gods of Limited
Radiance, of Immeasurable Radiance, and of Streaming
Radiance; the third jhana to rebirth among the gods of Limited
Glory, of Immeasurable Glory, and of Refulgent Glory. The
fourth jhana ordinarily leads to rebirth among the gods of Great
Fruit, but if it is developed with a desire to attain an insentient
mode of existence, it will conduce to rebirth among the non-
percipient beings, for whom consciousness is temporarily sus-
pended. The fine-material realm also contains five special planes
that are exclusively for the rebirth of non-returners. These are
the Pure Abodes - the Aviha, the Atappa, the Sudassa, the
Sudassi, and the Akanittha. In each of these planes in the fine-
material realm the lifespan is said to be of enormous duration
and to increase significantly in each higher plane.

The third realm of being is the immaterial realm, where
matter has become non-existent and only mental processes
exist. This realm consists of four planes, which are the objective
counterparts of the fopr immaterial meditative attainments,
from which they result and whose names they share: the
bases of infinite space, infinite consciousness, nothingness.



48 The Majjhima Nikaya


and neither-perception-nor-non-perception. The lifespans
ascribed to them are respectively 20,000; 40,000; 60,000; and
84,000 great aeons.

In Buddhist cosmology existence in every realm, being the
product of a kamma with a finite potency, is necessarily imper-
manent. Beings take rebirth in accordance with their deeds,
experience the good or bad results, and then, when the genera-
tive kamma has spent its force, they pass away to take rebirth
elsewhere as determined by still another kamma that has found
the opportunity to ripen. Hence the torments of hell as well as
the bliss of heaven, no matter how long they may last, are bound
to pass. For this reason the Buddha does not locate the final goal
of his teaching anywhere within the conditioned world. He
guides those whose spiritual faculties are still tender to aspire
for a heavenly rebirth and teaches them the lines of conduct that
conduce to the fulfilment of their aspirations (MN 41, MN 120).
But for those whose faculties are mature and who can grasp the
unsatisfactory nature of everything conditioned, he urges deter-
mined effort to put an end to wandering in samsara and to reach
Nibbana, which transcends all planes of being.

THE BUDDHA AND HIS CONTEMPORARIES

The Middle Country of India in which the Buddha lived and
taught in the fifth century B.C. teemed with a luxuriant variety
of religious and philosophical beliefs propagated by teachers
equally varied in their ways of life. The main division was into
the brahmins and the non-brahmanic ascetics, the samanas or
"recluses." The brahmins were the hereditary priesthood of
India, the custodians of the ancient orthodoxy. They accepted
the authority of the Vedas, which they studied, chanted at
countless rituals, sacrifices, and ceremonies, and turned to as the
source of their philosophical speculations. Thus they are charac-
terised in the suttas as traditionalists (anussavika), who teach
their doctrines on the basis of oral tradition (MN 100.7). The Pali
Canon generally depicts them as living a comfortably settled
life, as marrying and begetting progeny, and in some cases as
enjoying royal patronage. The more learned among them gath-
ered a company of students - ail necessarily of brahmin birth -
to whom they taught the Vedic hymns.


Introduction 49


The samanas, on the other hand, did not accept the authority
of the Vedas, for which reason from the perspective of the brah-
mins they stood in the ranks of heterodoxy. They were usually
celibate, lived a life of mendicancy, and acquired their status by
voluntary renunciation rather than by birth. The samanas
roamed the Indian countryside sometimes in company, some-
times as solitaries, preaching their doctrines to the populace,
debating with other ascetics, engaging in their spiritual prac-
tices, which often involved severe austerities (see MN 51.8).
Some teachers in the samana camp taught entirely on the basis
of reasoning and speculation, while others taught on the basis of
their experiences in meditation. The Buddha placed himself
among the latter, as one who teaches a Dhamma that he has
directly known for himself (MN 100.7).

The Buddha's encounters with brahmins were usually friend-
ly, their conversations marked by courtesy and mutual regard.
Several suttas in the Majjhima Nikaya concern the brahmins'
claim to superiority over those in other social classes. In the
Buddha's age the caste system was only beginning to take shape
in northeast India and had not yet spawned the countless
subdivisions and rigid regulations that were to manacle Indian
society through the centuries. Society was divided into four
broad social classes: the brahmins, who performed the priestly
functions; the khattiyas, the nobles, warriors, and administrators;
the vessas, the merchants and agriculturalists; and the suddas, the
menials and serfs. From the Pali suttas it appears that the brah-
mins, while vested with authority in religious matters, had not
yet risen to the position of unchallengeable hegemony they were
to gain after the promulgation of the Laws of Manu. They had,
however, already embarked on their drive for domination and
did so by propagating the thesis that brahmins are the highest
caste, the fairest caste, the divinely blessed offspring of Brahma
who are alone capable of purification. Anxiety that this claim of
the brahmins might actually be true seems to have spread
among the royalty, who must have been fearful of the threat it
posed to their own power (see MN 84.4, MN 90.9-10).

Contrary to certain popular notions, the Buddha did not explic-
itly repudiate the class divisions of Indian society or appeal for
the abolition of this social system. Within the Sangha, however, all
caste distinctions were abrogated from the moment of ordination.



50 The Majjhima Nikaya


Thus people from any of the four castes who went forth under the
Buddha renounced their class titles and prerogatives and instead
became known simply as disciples of the Sakyan son (see
Ud 5:5/55). Whenever the Buddha or his disciples were
confronted with the brahmins' claim to superiority, they argued
vigorously against them, maintaining that all such claims were
groundless. Purification, they contended, was the result of con-
duct, not of birth, and was thus accessible to those of all four
castes (MN 40.13-14, MN 84, MN 90.12, MN 93). The Buddha
even stripped the term "brahmin" of its hereditary accretions, and
hearkening back to its original connotation of holy man, he
defined the true brahmin as the arahant (MN 98). Those among
the brahmins who were not yet hampered by class prejudice
responded appreciatively to the Buddha's teaching. Some of the
most eminent brahmins of the time, in whom there still burned
the ancient Vedic yearning for light, knowledge, and truth, recog-
nised in the Buddha the All-Enlightened One for whom they
longed and declared themselves his disciples (see especially
MN 91.34). Several even renounced their class privileges and with
their retinues entered the Sangha (MN 7.22, MN 92.15-24).

The samanas were a much more diversified group which,
lacking a common scriptural authority, promulgated a plethora
of philosophical doctrines ranging from the diabolical to the
superdivine. The Pali Canon frequently mentions six teachers in
particular as contemporaries of the Buddha, and as they are
each described as "the head, of an order. . .regarded by many as a
saint" (MN 77.5), they must have been quite influential at the
time. The Majjhima Nikaya mentions both the set of six and,
separately, states their individual doctrines; it does not, however,
correlate the names with the doctrines. The connections between
names and doctrines are made in the Samannaphala Sutta of the
Digha Nikaya.

Purana Kassapa, who is always mentioned first in the list,
taught a doctrine of inaction ( akiriyavada ) that denied the validi-
ty of moral distinctions (MN 60.13, MN 76.10). Makkhali Gosala
was the leader of the sect known as the Ajivakas (or Ajlvikas),
which survived in India down into the medieval period. He
taught a doctrine of fatalism that denied causality ( ahetukavada )
and claimed that the entire cosmic process is rigidly controlled
by a principle called fate or destiny ( niyati ); beings have no


Introduction 51


volitional control over their actions but move helplessly caught
in the grip of fate (MN 60.21, MN 76.13). Ajita Kesakambalin
was a moral nihilist ( natthikavada ) who propounded a material-
ist philosophy that rejected the existence of an afterlife and
kammic retribution (MN 60.5, MN 76.7); his doctrine is always
cited by the Buddha as the paradigmatic instance of wrong
view among the unwholesome courses of action. Pakudha
Kaccayana advocated an atomism on the basis of which he
repudiated the basic tenets of morality (MN 76.16). Sanjaya
Belatthiputta, a sceptic, refused to take a stand on the crucial
moral and philosophical issues of the day, probably claiming
that such knowledge was beyond our capacity for verification
(MN 76.30). The sixth teacher, the Nigantha Nataputta, is iden-
tified with Mahavlra, the historical progenitor of Jainism. He
taught that there exists a plurality of monadic souls entrapped
in matter by the bonds of past kamma and that the soul is to be
liberated by exhausting its kammic bonds through the practice
of severe self-mortification.

Whereas the Pali suttas are generally cordial but critical towards
the brahmins, they are trenchant in their rejection of the rival doc-
trines of the samaras. In one sutta (MN 60) the Buddha contends
that the firm adoption of any of the first three doctrines (and by
implication the fourth) entails a chain of unwholesome states gen-
erating evil kamma strong enough to bring a descent into the
lower realms. Similarly the venerable Ananda describes these
views as four "negations of the holy life" (MN 76). The scepticism
of Sanjaya, while not regarded as so pernicious, is taken as an indi-
cation of its proponent's dullness and confusion; it is described as
"eel-wriggling" ( amaravikkhepa ) because of its evasiveness and
classified among the types of holy life that are without consolation
(MN 76.30-31). The Jain doctrine, though sharing certain similari-
ties with the Buddha's teaching, was held to be sufficiently
mistaken in basic assumptions as to call for refutation, which the
Buddha undertook on several occasions (MN 14, MN 56, MN 101).
The repudiation of these erroneous views was seen, from the
Buddhist perspective, to be a necessary measure not only to sound
a clear warning against tenets that werepspiritually detrimental,
but also to cut away the obstacles agaihst the acceptance of right
view, which as the forerunner of the Buddha's path (MN 117.4)
was a prerequisite to progress along the road to final deliverance.


52 The Majjhima Nikaya


TECHNICAL NOTES

There remain to be discussed only a few technical points con-
cerning this translation: first a general problem inevitably facing
any translator from the Pali Canon, then certain changes that
have been made in Ven. Nanamoli's renderings of important
doctrinal terms.

THE REPETITIONS

Readers of Pali suttas, particularly in the original language, will
immediately be struck by the frequency and length of the repeti-
tive passages. The repetitions, if examined, will be found to be
of different kinds and thus probably stem from different
sources. We may consider three main types.

First are the narrative repetitions within a single sutta as well as
the repetition of statements in ordinary conversation. These
doubtlessly originate from the method of oral transmission by
which the suttas were preserved for the first four centuries of
their existence, such repetition serving as a useful mnemonic
device to ensure that details would not be lost. In this translation
these repetitions have usually been bridged over with ellipsis
points and occasionally the liberty was taken of contracting them.

A second type of repetition stems from the use of stock for-
mulas to describe fixed sets of doctrinal categories or aspects
of the training. A commoq example of this is the formulas for
the four jhanas and the three true knowledges. These formulas
were almost certainly part of the Buddha's repertory of
instructions, employed by him in the countless discourses he
gave during his forty-five years' ministry in order to preserve
the unity and consistency of his teaching. Here the shorter
stereotyped formulas have generally been allowed to stand
except when they play a subordinate role to a larger theme, in
which case only the main clauses have been retained; an exam-
ple is the treatment of the jhana formula at MN 53.18. The
longer formulas that appear very often have been abridged,
with references usually given to the passages where they
appear in full; examples are the treatment of the first two true
knowledges at MN 27.23-24 and of the gradual training at
MN 38.31-38.


Introduction 53


A third type of repetition stems from the Buddha's application
of an identical method of exposition to a series of doctrinal terms
belonging to a fixed set. Examples are the formula for insight that
is attached to each of the exercises in the Satipatthana Sutta
(MN 10.5), and the exposition on the three characteristics applied
to each of the five aggregates (MN 22.26). These repetitions, con-
trary to modernistic suppositions, were very likely integral to the
Buddha's own pedagogical method and served to drive home the
points he wanted to convey. We can well imagine that such repe-
titions, delivered by a fully enlightened teacher to those earnestly
striving for awakening, must have sunk down deep into the
minds of those who heard them and in many cases triggered off a
glimpse of the truth. In the translation this type of repetition has
usually been handled by repeating the method of exposition only
for the first and last terms in the set - as is often done in the Pali
editions of the texts - except when the method of exposition is
especially long (as at MN 118.37-39), in which case it is shown in
full only for the first term and in much abbreviated form for the
rest. Those who read the suttas as an exercise in contemplation,
and not merely for information, may try mentally filling in the
entire sequence and exploring its range of implications.

DHAMMA

In his later translations Ven. Nanamoli appears to have set him-
self two goals: to render virtually every Pali word into English
(arahant and bodhisatta are rare exceptions); and to do so in obedi-
ence to a very rigorous standard of consistency. In effect the prin-
ciple that guided his work was: one Pali word, one correspond-
ing English word. This principle he also applied to his treatment
of the multiplex word dhamma, of which he wrote elsewhere that
"the need for unity in the rendering is so great as to be almost
desperate" ( Minor Readings and Illustrator, p. 331). He chose as his
root rendering the word "idea," which he atte mpted to deploy for
the Pali word in all its diverse occurrences. Even when dhamma is
used in the suttas to signify the Buddha's teaching, he still
remained faithful to his choice by translating it "the True Idea."

Needless to say, this experiment was not successful. Recog-
nising this, Ven. Khantipalo, in his edition of the ninety suttas,
opted instead to retain the Pali word in most of its occurrences.


54 The Majjhima Nikaya


This decision, however, seems to have been unnecessary when
the relinquishing of the demand for strict consistency allows for
smooth and reliable translation without loss of meaning. While
the many different uses of the Pali word dhamma may originally
have had some underlying connection of meaning, by the time
of the Pali Canon such connection had already receded so far
into the background as to be virtually irrelevant to the under-
standing of the texts. The commentaries ascribe at least ten dif-
ferent contextual meanings to the word as it occurs in the Canon
and they do not try to read any philosophical significance into
this variability of application. The goal of lucid translation there-
fore seems to require that the word be rendered differently
according to its context, which generally makes the intended
meaning clear.

In revising Ven. Nanamoli's translation I have retained the
Pali word Dhamma only when it refers to the Buddha's teaching,
or in several cases to a rival teaching with which the Buddha's is
contrasted (as at MN 11.13 and MN 104.2). In its other uses the
context has been allowed to decide the rendering. Thus when
dhamma occurs in the plural as a general ontological reference
term it has been rendered "things" (as at MN 1.2 and MN 2.5).
When it acquires a more technical nuance, in the sense either of
the phenomena of existence or of mental constituents, it has
been rendered “states" (as at MN 64.9 and MN 111.4). This term,
however, must be divested of its overtone of staticity, dhammas
being events within a dynamic process, and it must also not be
taken to refer to some persisting entity that undergoes the states,
entities themselves being nothing but connected series of dham-
mas. The last two meanings of dhamma are not always separable
in the texts and sometimes naturalness of English diction had to
be used as the factor for deciding which should be selected.

As the fourth foundation of mindfulness and as the sixth
external sense base ( ayatana ), dhamma has been rendered "mind-
objects" (even here "ideas" is too narrow). In still other con-
texts it has been rendered as factors (MN 10.5), qualities
(MN 15.3, MN 48.6) and teachings (MN 46.2, MN 47.3). When
used as a suffix it acquires the idiomatic sense of "to be subject
to" and so it has been translated, e.g., viparinamadhamma as
"subject to change."


Introduction 55


sankhAra

Although this word as used in the suttas has different specific
references in different contexts, unlike dhamma it retains enough
unity of meaning to permit, with rare exceptions, a uniform ren-
dering. The problem, however, is to decide which of the many
proposed renderings is the most adequate, or, if none are found
fitting, to coin a new one that is.

The root idea suggested by the word sankhara is "making
together." The Pali commentators explain that the word allows
for both an active and a passive sense. Thus the sankharas are
either factors (or forces) that function together in producing an
effect, or they are the things that are produced by a combina-
tion of co-operating factors. In his translation of the
Visuddhimagga Ven. Nanamoli had rendered sankharas as "for-
mations," a rendering favoured by many other translators. In his
later translation scheme he had experimented with rendering it
as "determinations" and had attempted to incorporate that new
choice into his manuscript of the Majjhima. In editing the
manuscript Ven. Khantipalo chose to return to the translator's
earlier and better known "formations," and in this edition I have
followed suit. Though this word has the disadvantage of accen-
tuating the passive aspect of sankharas, it avoids the problems
into which "determinations" runs and seems colourless enough
to take on the meaning determined by the context.

The word sankhara occurs in four major contexts in the Pali
suttas: (1) As the second factor in the formula of dependent orig-
ination it is used to mean volitional actions, suggesting their
active role of generating results in the process of rebirth. (2) As
the fourth of the five aggregates the sankharas comprise all the
mental factors not included in the other three mental aggregates;
this group is probably assigned the name sankharakkhandha after
its chief member, volition ( cetana ), which is responsible for form-
ing all the other aggregates. (3) Sankhara is also used in a very
comprehensive sense to signify everything produced by condi-
tions. In this sense it comprises all five aggregates (as at MN 35.4
and MN 115.12). Here the word bears the passive sense, being
explained by the commentators as sankhatasankhdra, "formations
consisting in the conditioned." This usage comes close in meaning


56 The Majjhima Nikaya


to the ontological use of dhamma, except that the latter is wider
in range since it includes the unconditioned element Nibbana
and concepts ( pahnatti ), both of which are excluded from
s ankhara. (4) In still another context the word s ankhara is used in
relation to kaya, vaci, and citta - body, speech, and mind - to
mean the bodily formation, which is in-and-out breathing; the
verbal formation, which is applied thought and sustained
thought; and the mental formation, which is perception and
feeling. The first and third are things that are dependent respec-
tively upon the body and the mind, the second the things that
activate speech. This triad is discussed at MN 44.13-15.

Sankhara is also employed outside these major contexts, and in
one such case Ven. Nanamoli's sense of "determination" has
been retained. This is where it occurs in the compound
padhanasankhara, which has been rendered "determined striv-
ing" (as at MN 16.26). The rare and involved idiom, s ankhararh
padahati, has similarly been rendered "he strives with determi-
nation" (MN 101.23). In another case (MN 120), following the
commentarial gloss, sankhara is rendered "aspiration."

NAMARtiPA

Ven. Nanamoli had translated this compound literally as
"name-and-form." In this edition the compound has been
changed back to the rendering used in his translation of the
Visuddhimagga, "mentality-materiality," though with regret that
this cumbersome Latinate expression lacks the concision and
punch of "name-and-form." The word ndma originally meant
"name," but in the Pali suttas it is used in this compound as a
collective term for the mental factors associated with conscious-
ness, as will be seen in the definition at MN 9.54. The commen-
taries explain ndma here as deriving from the word namati, to
bend, and as being applied to the mental factors because they
"bend" towards the object in the act of cognizing it. Rttpa is used
in two major contexts in the suttas: as the first of the five aggre-
gates and as the specific object of eye-consciousness. The former
is a broader category that includes the latter as one among many
other species of rupa. Ven. Nanamoli, aiming at consistency in
his manuscript translation, had used "form" for rupa as visible
object (in preference to the "visible-datum" used in his earlier


Introduction 57


translation scheme). But when rupa is used to signify the first of
the five aggregates, it has been changed to "material form." This
rendering should indicate more precisely the meaning of rupa in
that context while preserving the connection with rupa as visible
object. Occasionally in the texts the word seems to straddle both
meaning without allowing an exclusive delimitation, as in the
context of certain meditative attainments such as the first two
liberations (MN 77.22).

BRAHMA

The word brahma provided Ven. Nanamoli with another chal-
lenge to his endeavour to achieve complete consistency. The
word itself, going back to the Vedic period, originally meant
holy power, the sacred power that sustains the cosmos and that
was contacted through the prayers and rituals of the Vedas.
Though the word retained its significance of "holy" or "sacred,"
by the Buddha's time it had undergone two distinct lines of
development. One culminated in the conception of Brahman
(neuter) as an impersonal absolute reality hidden behind and
manifesting through the changing phenomena of the world.
This conception is the keynote of the Upanishads, but the word
brahma never appears in this sense in the Pali Canon. The other
line of development culminated in the conception of Brahma
(masculine singular) as an eternal personal God who creates and
regulates the world. This conception was held by the brahmins
as depicted in the Pali suttas. The Buddhists themselves asserted
that Brahma was not a single creator God but a collective name
for several classes of high deities whose chiefs, forgetting that
they are still transient beings in the grip of kamma, were prone
to imagine themselves to be the omnipotent everlasting creator
(see MN 49).

Ven. Nanamoli attempted to fulfil his guideline of consistency
by rendering the word brahma in its various occurrences by
"divine" or its cognates. Thus Brahma the deity was rendered
"the Divinity," brahmana (= brahmin) was rendered "divine" (as a
noun meaning a priestly theologian), and the expression brahma-
cariya, in which brahma functions as an adjective, was rendered
"the Life Divine." The result of this experiment was again the
sacrifice of clarity for the sake of consistency, even at the risk of


58 The Majjhima Nikaya


generating misunderstanding, and therefore in the revisionary
process I decided to treat these expressions in line with more
conventional practices. Thus Brahma and brahmin have been
left untranslated (the latter word is probably already more
familiar to modern readers than the archaic noun "divine"). The
word brahma, as it appears in compounds, has usually been ren-
dered "holy" - e.g., brahmacariya as "the holy life" except when
it is used to signify total sexual abstinence, in which case it has
been rendered in accordance with its intended meaning as
"celibacy." The word "divine" has, however, been retained in
the expression brahmavihara, rendered "divine abode" (MN 83.6)
with reference to the "immeasurable" meditations on loving-
kindness, compassion, appreciative joy, and equanimity, which
are the dwellings of the divinity Brahma (MN 55.7) and the path
to rebirth in the Brahma-world (MN 99.22).

A NOTE ON PRONUNCIATION

The pronunciation of Pali words and names is quite easy provid-
ing the following simple rules are heeded. Among the vowels:

a i u as in "but," "pin," "duke";

a l u as in "father," "keen," "pool";

e and o as in "way" and "home."

Among the consonants, g is pronounced as in "girl," c as in
"church," h as in "canyon." The cerebrals -t,d,n,l- are spoken
with the tongue on the roof of the mouth; the dentals - f, d,n, l -
with the tongue on the upper teeth, m is a nasal as in "sing." The
aspirates - kh, gh, ch, jh, th, dh, th, dh, ph, and bh - are single con-
sonants pronounced with a slight outward puff of breath, e.g., th
as in "Thomas" (not as in "that"), ph as in "top hat" (not as in
"phone"). Double consonants are always enunciated separately,
e.g., dd as in "mad dog," gg as in "big gun."

An o and an e always carry a stress, otherwise the stress falls
on a long vowel -a,i, or u- or on a double consonant, or on m.


Introduction 59


MAJOR CHANGES IN TERMINOLOGY

This list shows the most important of the changes in Ven.
Nanamoli's manuscript terminology that were made for this
edition. Changes marked with an asterisk were already intro-
duced by Ven. Khantipalo in A Treasury of the Buddha's Words.


PALI TERM

MS RENDERING

REVISED RENDERING

akusala

unprofitable

unwholesome

ajjhosana

cleaving

holding

abhinivesa

insistence

adherence

arupa

formless

immaterial

*asekha

the Adept

one beyond training

iddhi

success

(1) supernormal power;

(2) spiritual power;

(3) success

uddhacca-kukkucca

agitation and

restlessness and


worry

remorse

upadhi

essentials of

(1) attachment;


existence

(2) object of attachment

ottappa

shame

fear of wrongdoing

kama

sensual desires

sensual pleasures

kusala

profitable

wholesome

khaya

exhaustion

destruction

*citta

cognizance

mind

chanda

zeal

(1) desire;

(2) zeal

*jhdna

illumination

jhana

*tathagata

the Perfect One

the Tathagata

thlna-middha

lethargy and
drowsiness

sloth and torpor

*dhamma

the True Idea

the Dhamma

dhamma

ideas

(1) things, states,
factors;

(2) mind-objects; ,

(3) qualities; /

(4) teachings

nandi

relishing

delight

nama

name

mentality



60 The Majjhima Nikaya


PALI TERM

MS RENDERING

REVISED RENDERING

namarupa

name-and-form

mentality-materiality

*nibbclna

extinction

Nibbana

nibbida

dispassion

disenchantment

pahha

understanding

wisdom

patigha

resistance

(1) sensory impact;

(2) aversion

padhana

endeavour

striving

papahca

diversification

proliferation

paritassana

anguish

agitation

piti

happiness

rapture

*buddha

the Enlightened
One

the Buddha

brahma

divine

holy, divine

brahma

the Divinity

Brahma

brahmana

divine (caste)

brahmin

bhavana

maintaining in
being

development

mudita

gladness

appreciative joy

rupa

form

(1) form;

(2) material form,
materiality;

(3) fine-material (being)

vicara

pondering

sustained thought

vicikiccha

uncertainty

doubt

vitakka

thought) thinking

thought, applied
thought

viraga

fading away of lust dispassion

sakkaya

embodiment

personality

*sankhara

determinations

formations

*sangha

the Community

the Sangha

*satta

creatures

beings

samana

monk

recluse

*s ekha

the Initiate

the disciple in higher
training

hiri

conscience

shame


A Summary of the 152 Suttas


PART one: THE ROOT FIFTY DISCOURSES

1 Mulapariyaya Sutta: The Root of All Things. The Buddha
analyses the cognitive processes of four types of indi-
viduals - the untaught ordinary person, the disciple in
higher training, the arahant, and the Tathagata. This is one
of the deepest and most difficult suttas in the Pali Canoii,
and it is therefore suggested that the earnest student read
it only in a cursory manner on a first reading of the
Majjhima Nikaya, returning to it for an in-depth study
after completing the entire collection.

2 Sabbasava Sutta : All the Taints. The Buddha teaches the
bhikkhus seven methods for restraining and abandoning
the taints, the fundamental defilements that maintain
bondage to the round df'birth and death.

3 Dhammadayada Sutta: Heirs in Dharnma. The Buddha
enjoins the bhikkhus to be heirs in Dharnma, not heirs in
material things. The venerable Sariputta then continues on
the same theme by explaining how disciples should train
themselves to become the Buddha's heirs in Dharnma.

4 Bhayabherava Sutta: Fear and Dread. The Buddha describes to
a brahmin the qualities required of a monk who wishes to
live alone in the forest. He then relates an account of his own
attempts to conquer fear when striving for enlightenment.

5 Anangana Sutta: Without Blemishes. The venerable
Sariputta gives a discourse to the bhikkhus on the meaning
of blemishes, explaining that a bhikkhu becomes blem-
ished when he falls under the sway of evil wishes.

6 Akankheyya Sutta: If a Bhikkhu Should Wish. The Buddha
begins by stressing the importance of virtue as the founda-
tion for a bhikkhu 's training; he then goes on to enumerate


61


62 The Majjhima Nikaya


the benefits that a bhikkhu can reap by properly fulfilling
the training.

7 Vatthupama Sutta : The Simile of the Cloth. With a simple
simile the Buddha illustrates the difference between a
defiled mind and a pure mind.

8 Sallekha Sutta: Effacement. The Buddha rejects the view
that the mere attainment of the meditative absorptions is
effacement and explains how effacement is properly prac-
tised in his teaching.

9 Sammaditthi Sutta: Right View. A long and important dis-
course by the venerable Sariputta, with separate sections
on the wholesome and the unwholesome, nutriment, the
Four Noble Truths, the twelve factors of dependent origi-
nation, and the taints.

10 Satipatthana Sutta: The Foundations of Mindfulness. This is
one of the fullest and most important suttas by the Buddha
dealing with meditation, with particular emphasis on the
development of insight. The Buddha begins by declaring
the four foundations of mindfulness to be the direct path
for the realisation of Nibbana, then gives detailed instruc-
tions on the four foundations: the contemplation of the
body, feelings, mind, and mind-objects.

11 Culasihanada Sutta: The Shorter Discourse on the Lion's
Roar. The Buddha declares that only in his Dispensation
can the four grades of noble individuals be found, explain-
ing how his teaching can be distinguished from other
creeds through its unique rejection of all doctrines of self.

12 Mahasihanada Sutta: The Greater Discourse on the Lion's
Roar. The Buddha expounds the ten powers of a Tathagata,
his four kinds of intrepidity, and other superior qualities,
which entitle him to "roar his lion's roar in the assemblies."

13 Mahadukkhakkhandha Sutta: The Greater Discourse on the
Mass of Suffering. The Buddha explains the full under-
standing of sensual pleasures, material form, and feelings;
there is a long section on the dangers in sensual pleasures.

14 Culadukkhakkhandha Sutta: The Shorter Discourse on the
Mass of Suffering. A variation on the preceding, ending in
a discussion with Jain ascetics on the nature of pleasure
and pain.


A Summary of the 152 Suttas 63


15 Anumana Sutta: Inference. The venerable Maha Mog-
gallana enumerates the qualities that make a bhikkhu diffi-
cult to admonish and teaches how one should examine
oneself to remove the defects in one's character.

16 Cetokhila Sutta: The Wilderness in the Heart. The Buddha
explains to the bhikkhus the five "wildernesses in the
heart" and the five "shackles in the heart."

17 Vanapattha Sutta: Jungle Thickets. A discourse on the con-
ditions under which a meditative monk should remain liv-
ing in a jungle thicket and the conditions under which he
should go elsewhere.

18 Madhupindika Sutta: The Honey Ball. The Buddha utters a
deep but enigmatic statement about "the source through
which perceptions and notions tinged by mental prolifera-
tion beset a man." This statement is elucidated by the ven-
erable Maha Kaccana, whose explanation is praised by the
Buddha.

19 Dvedhavitakka Sutta: Two Kinds of Thought. With reference
to his own struggle for enlightenment, the Buddha
explains the way to overcome unwholesome thoughts and
replace them by wholesome thoughts.

20 Vitakkasanthana Sutta: The Removal of Distracting
Thoughts. The Buddha teaches five methods for dealing
with the unwholesome thoughts that may arise in the
course of meditation.

21 Kakacupama Sutta: The Simile of the Saw. A discourse on
the need to maintain patience when addressed with dis-
agreeable words.

22 Alagaddupama Sutta: The Simile of the Snake. A bhikkhu

named Arittha gives rise to a pernicious view that conduct
prohibited by the Buddha is not really an obstruction. The
Buddha reprimands him and, with a series of memorable
similes, stresses the dangers in misapplying and misrepre-
senting the Dhamma. The sutta culminates in one of the
most impressive disquisitions on non-self found in the
Canon. ✓

23 Vammika Sutta: The Ant-hill. A deity presents a monk with
an obscure riddle, which is unravelled for him by the
Buddha.


64 The Majjhima Nikaya



24 Rathavimta Sutta : The Relay Chariots. The venerable Punna
Mantaniputta explains to Sariputta that the goal of the
holy life, final Nibbana, is to be reached by way of the
seven stages of purification.

25 Nivdpa Sutta : The Bait. The Buddha uses the analogy of
deer-trappers to make known to the bhikkhus the obsta-
cles that confront them in their effort to escape from
Mara's control.

26 Ariyapariyesand Sutta: The Noble Search. The Buddha gives
the bhikkhus a long account of his own quest for enlight-
enment from the time of his life in the palace up to his
transmission of the Dhamma to his first five disciples.

27 Culahatthipadopama Sutta : The Shorter Discourse on the
Simile of the Elephant's Footprint. Using the analogy of a
woodsman tracking down a big bull elephant, the Buddha
explains how a disciple arrives at complete certainty of the
truth of his teaching. The sutta presents a full account of
the step-by-step training of the Buddhist monk.

28 Mahahatthipadopama Sutta: The Greater Discourse on the
Simile of the Elephant's Footprint. The venerable Sariputta
begins with a statement of the Four Noble Truths, which he
then expounds by way of the contemplation of the four ele-
ments and the dependent origination of the five aggregates.

29 Mahasaropama Sutta: The Greater Discourse on the Simile

of the Heartwood.

30 Culasaropama Sutta: The Shorter Discourse on the Simile of

the Heartwood.

These two discourses emphasise that the proper goal of
the holy life is the unshakeable deliverance of the mind, to
which all other benefits are subsidiary.

31 Culagosinga Sutta: The Shorter Discourse in Gosinga. The
Buddha meets three bhikkhus who are living in concord,
"blending like milk and water," and inquires how they
' succeed in living together so harmoniously.

32 Mahagosinga Sutta: The Greater Discourse in Gosinga. On a
beautiful moonlit night a number of senior disciples meet
together in a sala-tree wood and discuss what kind of
bhikkhu could illuminate the wood. After each has
answered according to his personal ideal, they go to the
Buddha, who provides his own answer.


A Summary of the 152 Suttas 65


33 Mahagopalaka Sutta: The Greater Discourse on the
Cowherd. The Buddha teaches eleven qualities that pre-
vent a bhikkhu's growth in the Dhamma and eleven quali-
ties that contribute to his growth.

34 Culagopalaka Sutta : The Shorter Discourse on the
Cowherd. The Buddha explains the types of bhikkhus
who "breast Mara's stream" and get safely across to the
further shore.

35 Culasaccaka Sutta: The Shorter Discourse to Saccaka. The
debater Saccaka boasts that in debate he can shake the
Buddha up and down and thump him about, but when he
finally meets the Buddha their discussion takes some
unexpected turns.

36 Mahasaccaka Sutta: The Greater Discourse to Saccaka. The
Buddha meets again with Saccaka and in the course of a
discussion on "development of body" and "development
of mind" he relates a detailed narrative on his own spiri-
tual quest.

37 Culatanhasankhaya Sutta: The Shorter Discourse on the
Destruction of Craving. The venerable Maha Moggallana
overhears the Buddha give a brief explanation to Sakka,
ruler of gods, as to how a bhikkhu is liberated through the
destruction of craving. Wishing to know if Sakka under-
stood the meaning, he makes a trip to the heaven of the
Thirty-three to find out.

38 Mahatanhasankhaya Sutta: The Greater Discourse on the
Destruction of Craving. A bhikkhu named Sati promul-
gates the pernicious view that the same consciousness
transmigrates from life to life. The Buddha reprimands
him with a lengthy discourse on dependent origination,
showing how all phenomena of existence arise and cease
through conditions.

39 Maha-Assapura Sutta: The Greater Discourse at Assapura.
The Buddha elucidates "the things that make one a
recluse" with a discourse covering many aspects of the
bhikkhu's training.

40 Cula-Assapura Sutta: The Shorter Discourse at Assapura.
The Buddha explains "the way proper to|the recluse" to be
not the mere outward practice of ai/sterities but the
inward purification from defilements. /


66 The Majjhima Nikaya


41 Sdleyyaka Sutta: The Brahmins of Sala.

42 Veranjaka Sutta : The Brahmins of Veranja.

In these two nearly identical suttas the Buddha explains to
groups of brahmin householders the courses of conduct
leading to rebirth in lower realms and the courses leading
to higher rebirth and deliverance.

43 Mahavedalla Sutta : The Greater Series of Questions and

Answers.

44 Culavedalla Sutta: The Shorter Series of Questions and

Answers.

These two discourses take the form of discussions on vari-
ous subtle points of Dhamma, the former between the ven-
erable Maha Kotthita and the venerable Sariputta, the latter
between the bhikkhunl Dhammadinna and the lay follower
Visakha.

45 Culadhammasamadana Sutta: The Shorter Discourse on

Ways of Undertaking Things.

46 MahadhammasamUdana Sutta: The Greater Discourse on

Ways of Undertaking Things.

The Buddha explains, differently in each of the two suttas,
four ways of undertaking things, distinguished according
to whether they are painful or pleasant now and whether
they ripen in pain or pleasure in the future.

47 Vimamsaka Sutta: The Inquirer. The Buddha invites the
bhikkhus to make a thorough investigation of himself in
order to find out whether or not he can be accepted as
fully enlightened.

48 Kosambiya Sutta: The Kosambians. During the period when
the bhikkhus at Kosambi are divided by a dispute, the
Buddha teaches them the six qualities that create love and
respect and conduce to unity. He then explains seven
extraordinary knowledges possessed by a noble disciple
who has realised the fruit of stream-entry.

49 Brahmanimantanika Sutta: The Invitation of a Brahma. Baka
the Brahma, a high divinity, adopts the pernicious view
that the heavenly world over which he presides is eternal
and that there is no higher state beyond. The Buddha visits
him to dissuade him from that wrong view and engages
him in a contest of Olympian dimensions.


A Summary of the 152 Suttas 67


50 Maratajjaniya Sutta : The Rebuke to Mara. Mara attempts to
harass the venerable Maha Moggallana, but the latter
relates a story of the distant past to warn Mara of the dan-
gers in creating trouble for a disciple of the Buddha.

PART TWO: THE MIDDLE EIFTY DISCOURSES

51 Kandaraka Sutta : To Kandaraka. The Buddha discusses four
kinds of persons found in the world - the one who tor-
ments himself, the one who torments others, the one who
torments both himself and others, and the one who tor-
ments neither but lives a truly holy life.

52 Atthakanagara Sutta : The man from Atthakanagara. The
venerable Ananda teaches eleven "doors to the Death-
less" by which a bhikkhu can attain the supreme security
from bondage.

53 Sekha Sutta : The Disciple in Higher Training. At the
Buddha's request the venerable Ananda gives a discourse
on the practices undertaken by a disciple in higher training.

54 Potaliya Sutta: To Potaliya. The Buddha teaches a presump-
tuous interlocutor the meaning of "the cutting off of
affairs" in his discipline. The sutta offers a striking series
of similes on the dangers in sensual pleasures.

55 Jlvaka Sutta: To Jivaka. The Buddha explains the regula-
tions he has laid down concerning meat-eating and
defends his disciples against unjust accusations.

56 Upali Sutta: To Upali. The wealthy and influential house-
holder Upali, a prominent supporter of the Jains, proposes
to go to the Buddha and refute his doctrine. Instead, he
finds himself converted by the Buddha's "converting
magic."

57 Kukkuravatika Sutta: The Dog-Duty Ascetic. The Buddha
meets two ascetics, one who imitates the behaviour of a
dog, the other who imitates the behaviour of an ox. He
reveals to them the futility of their practices and gives
them a discourse on kamma and its fruit.

58 Abhayarajakumara Sutta: To Prince Abhaya. The Jain leader,
Nigantha Nataputta, teaches Prince Abhaya a "two-
horned question" with which' he can refute the Bfuddha's




what kind of speech he would and would not utter.

59 Bahuvedamya Sutta : The Many Kinds of Feeling. After
resolving a disagreement about the classification of feel-
ings, the Buddha enumerates the different kinds of pleasure

and joy that beings can experience. |

60 Apannaka Sutta: The Incontrovertible Teaching. The Buddha |
gives a group of brahmin householders an "incontrovert- f
ible teaching" that will help them steer clear of the tangle in

contentious views. i

I

61 Ambalatthikarahulovdda Sutta: Advice to Rahula at
Ambalatthika. The Buddha admonishes his son, the novice
Rahula, on the dangers in lying and stresses the importance
of constant reflection on one's motives.

62 Maharahulovada Sutta: The Greater Discourse of Advice to
Rahula. The Buddha teaches Rahula the meditation on the
elements, on mindfulness of breathing, and other topics.

63 Culamalunkya Sutta: The Shorter Discourse to Malunkya-
putta. A bhikkhu threatens to leave the Order unless the
Buddha answers his metaphysical questions. With the simile
of the man struck by a poisoned arrow, the Buddha makes
plain exactly what he does and does not teach.

64 Mahamalunkya Sutta: The Greater Discourse to
Malunkyaputta. The Buddha teaches the path to the aban-
doning of the five lower fetters.

65 Bhaddali Sutta: To Bhaddali. The Buddha admonishes a
recalcitrant monk and explains the disadvantages of refus-
ing to submit to the training.

66 Latukikopama Sutta: The Simile of the Quail. The Buddha
drives home the importance of abandoning all fetters, no
matter how harmless and trifling they may seem.

67 Catumd Sutta: At Catuma. The Buddha teaches a group of
newly ordained monks four dangers to be overcome by
those who have gone forth into homelessness.

68 Nalakapana Sutta: At Nalakapana. The Buddha explains
why, when his disciples die, he declares their level of
attainment and plane of rebirth.

69 Gulissdni Sutta: Gulissani. The venerable Sariputta gives a dis-
course on the proper training of a forest-dwelling bhikkhu.



A Summary of the 152 Suttas 69


70 Kltagiri Sutta : At Kltagiri. The Buddha admonishes a group
of disobedient monks, in the course of which he presents
an important sevenfold classification of noble disciples.

71 Tevijjavacchagotta Sutta: To Vacchagotta on the Threefold
True Knowledge. The Buddha denies possessing complete
knowledge of everything at all times and defines the three-
fold knowledge he does possess.

72 Aggivacchagotta Sutta: To Vacchagotta on Fire. The Buddha
explains to a wanderer why he does not hold any specula-
tive views. With the simile of an extinguished fire he tries
to indicate the destiny of the liberated being.

73 Mahavacchagotta Sutta: The Greater Discourse to Vaccha-
gotta. The story of the wanderer Vacchagotta's full conver-
sion to the Dhamma, his going forth, and his attainment of
arahantship.

74 Dlghanakha Sutta: To Dlghanakha. The Buddha counters the
disclaimers of a sceptic and teaches him the way to libera-
tion through the contemplation of feelings.

75 Magandiya Sutta: To Magandiya, The Buddha meets the
hedonist philosopher Magandiya and points out to him the
dangers in sensual pleasures, the benefits of renunciation,
and the meaning of Nibbana.

76 Sandaka Sutta: To Sandaka. The venerable Ananda teaches a
group of wanderers four ways that negate the living of the
holy life and four kinds of holy life without consolation.
Then he explains the holy life that is truly fruitful.

77 Mahasakuludayi Sutta: The Greater Discourse to
Sakuludayin. The Buddha teaches a group of wanderers the
reasons why his disciples venerate him and look to him for
guidance.

78 Samanamandika Sutta: Samanamandikaputta. The Buddha
explains how a man is "one who has attained to the
supreme attainment."

79 Culasakuludayi Sutta: The Shorter Discourse to Sakuludayin.

The Buddha examines the doctrine of a wandering ascetic,
using the simile of "the most beautiful girl in the country" to
expose the folly of his claims. /

80 Vekhanassa Sutta: To Vekhanassa. A discourse parley similar
to the preceding one, with an additional section on sensual
pleasure.







i



81 Ghatikara Suffer. Ghatikara the Potter. The Buddha recounts
the story of the chief lay supporter of the past Buddha
Kassapa.

82 Ratthapala Sutta: On Ratthapala. The story of a young man
who goes forth into homelessness against the wishes of his
parents and later returns to visit them.

83 Makhadeva Sutta: King Makhadeva. The story of an ancient
lineage of kings and how their virtuous tradition was bro-
ken due to negligence.

84 Madhura Sutta: At Madhura. The venerable Maha
Kaccana examines the brahmin claim that brahmins are
the highest caste.

85 Bodhirajakumara Sutta: To Prince Bodhi. The Buddha coun-
ters the claim that pleasure is to be gained through pain
with an account of his own quest for enlightenment.

86 Angulimala Sutta: On Angulimala. The story of how the
Buddha subdued the notorious criminal Angulimala and
led him to the attainment of arahantship.

87 Piyajatika Sutta: Born from Those Who Are Dear. Why the
Buddha teaches that sorrow and grief arise from those
who are dear.

88 Bahitika Sutta: The Cloak. The venerable Ananda answers
King Pasenadi's questions on the Buddha's behaviour.

89 Dhammacetiya Sutta: Monuments to the Dhamma. King
Pasenadi offers ten reasons why he shows such deep ven-
eration to the Buddha.

90 Kannakatthala Sutta: At Kannakatthala. King Pasenadi
questions the Buddha on omniscience, on caste distinc-
tions, and on the gods.

91 Brahmayu Sutta: Brahmayu. An old and erudite brahmin
learns about the Buddha, goes to meet him, and becomes
his disciple.

92 Seta Sutta: To Sela. The brahmin Sela questions the
Buddha, gains faith in him, and becomes a monk along
with his company of pupils.

93 Assaldyana Sutta: To Assalayana. A young brahmin
approaches the Buddha to argue the thesis that the brah-
mins are the highest caste.

94 Ghotamukha Sutta: To Ghotamukha. A discussion between
a brahmin and a bhikkhu on whether the renunciate life
accords with the Dhamma.




A Summary of the 152 Suttas 71


95 Cankl Sutta: With CankT. The Buddha instructs a young
brahmin on the preservation of truth, the discovery of
truth, and the final arrival at truth.

96 Esukdn Sutta: To Esukarl. The Buddha and a brahmin dis-
cuss the brahmins' claim to superiority over the other castes.

97 Dhanahjani Sutta: To Dhananjani. The venerable Sariputta
admonishes a brahmin who tries to excuse his negligence
by appeal to his many duties. Later, when he is close to
death, Sariputta guides him to rebirth in the Brahma-world
but is reprimanded by the Buddha for having done so.

98 Vfisettha Sutta: To Vasettha. The Buddha resolves a dispute
between two young brahmins on the qualities of a true
brahmin.

99 Subha Sutta: To Subha. The Buddha answers a young brah-
min's questions and teaches him the way to rebirth in the
Brahma- world.

100 Sangarava Sutta: To Sangarava. A brahmin student ques-
tions the Buddha about the basis on which he teaches the
fundamentals of the holy life.

PART THREE: THE FINAL FIFTY DISCOURSES

101 Devadaha Sutta: At Devadaha. The Buddha examines the
Jain thesis that liberation is to be attained by self-mortifica-
tion, proposing a different account of how striving
becomes fruitful.

102 Pahcattaya Sutta: The Five and Three. A survey of various
speculative views about the future and the past and of
misconceptions about Nibbana.

103 Kinti Sutta: What Do You Think About Me? The Buddha
explains how the monks can resolve disagreements about
the Dhamma.

104 Samagama Sutta: At Samagama. The Buddha lays down
disciplinary procedures for the guidance of the Sangha to
ensure its harmonious functioning after his demise.

105 Sunakkhatta Sutta: To Sunakkhatta. The Buddha discusses

the problem of an individual's overestimation of his
progress in meditation. i

106 Anehjasappaya Sutta: The Way to the Imperturbable. The
Buddha explains the approaches to various levels of higher
meditative states culminating in Nibbana.



72 The Majjhima Nikaya


107 Ganakamoggallana Sutta : To Ganaka Moggallana. The
Buddha sets forth the gradual training of the Buddhist
monk and describes himself as the "shower of the way."

108 Gopakamoggallana Sutta: With Gopaka Moggallana. The ven-
erable Ananda explains how the Sangha maintains its unity
and internal discipline after the passing away of the Buddha.

109 Mahdpunnama Sutta : The Greater Discourse on the Full-
moon Night. A bhikkhu questions the Buddha on the five
aggregates, clinging, personality view, and the realisation
of non-self.

110 Culapunnama Sutta: The Shorter Discourse on the Full-
moon Night. The Buddha explains the differences between
an "untrue man" and a "true man."

111 Anupada Sutta: One by One As They Occurred. The Buddha
describes the venerable Sariputta's development of insight
when he was training for the attainment of arahantship.

112 Chabbisodhana Sutta: The Sixfold Purity. The Buddha
explains how a bhikkhu should be interrogated when he
claims final knowledge and how he would answer if his
claim is genuine.

113 Sappurisa Sutta: The True Man. The Buddha distinguishes
the character of a true man from that of an untrue man.

114 Sevitabbasevitabba Sutta: To Be Cultivated and Not To Be
Cultivated. The Buddha sets up three brief outlines of
things to be cultivated and not to be cultivated, and the
venerable Sariputta fills in the details.

115 Bahudhatuka Sutta: The Many Kinds of Elements. The
Buddha expounds in detail the elements, the sense bases,
dependent origination, and the kinds of situations that are
possible and impossible in the world.

116 Isigili Sutta: Isigili: The Gullet of the Seers. An enumeration
of the names and epithets of paccekabuddhas who former-
ly dwelt on the mountain Isigili.

117 Mahdcattansaka Sutta: The Great Forty. The Buddha defines
the factors of the Noble Eightfold Path and explains their
inter-relationships .

118 Andpdnasati Sutta: Mindfulness of Breathing. An exposition
of sixteen steps in mindfulness of breathing and of the
relation of this meditation to the four foundations of mind-
fulness and the seven enlightenment factors.


A Summary of the 1 52 Suttas 73


119 Kdyagatasati Sutta: Mindfulness of the Body. The Buddha
explains how mindfulness of the body should be devel-
oped and cultivated and the benefits to which it leads.

120 Sankharupapatti Sutta: Reappearance by Aspiration. The
Buddha teaches how one can be reborn in accordance with
one's wish.

121 Culasuhhata Sutta : The Shorter Discourse on Voidness. The
Buddha instructs Ananda on the "genuine, undistorted,
pure descent into voidness."

122 Mahasuhhata Sutta: The Greater Discourse on Voidness.
Upon finding that the bhikkhus have grown fond of social-
ising, the Buddha stresses the need for seclusion in order
to abide in voidness.

123 Acchariya-abbhuta Sutta: Wonderful and Marvellous. At a
gathering of bhikkhus the venerable Ananda recounts the
wonderful and marvellous events that preceded and
attended the birth of the Buddha.

124 Bakkula Sutta: Bakkula. The elder disciple Bakkula enumer-
ates his austere practices during his eighty years in the
Sangha and exhibits a remarkable death.

125 Dantabhumi Sutta: The Grade of the Tamed. By analogy
with the taming of an elephant, the Buddha explains how
he tames his disciples.

126 Bhumija Sutta: Bhumija. The Buddha brings forward a
series of similes to illustrate the natural fruitfulness of the
Noble Eightfold Path.

127 Anuruddha Sutta: Anuruddha. The venerable Anuruddha
clarifies the difference between the immeasurable deliver-
ance of mind and the exalted deliverance of mind.

128 Upakkilesa Sutta: Imperfections. The Buddha discusses the
various impediments to meditative progress he encoun-
tered during his quest for enlightenment, with particular
reference to the divine eye.

129 Balapandita Sutta: Fools and Wise Men. The sufferings of
hell and animal life into which a fool is reborn through his
evil deeds, and the pleasures of heaven that a wise man
reaps through his good deeds.

130 Devaduta Sutta: The Divine Messengers. The Buddha

describes the sufferings of hell that await the evil-doer
after death. /


74 The Majjhima Nikaya


131 Bhaddekaratta Sutta: One Fortunate Attachment.

132 Anandabhaddekaratta Sutta: Ananda and One Fortunate

Attachment.

133 Mahakaccanabhaddekaratta Sutta: Maha Kaccana and One

Fortunate Attachment.

134 Lomasakangiyabhaddekaratta Sutta: Lomasakangiya and One

Fortunate Attachment.

The above four suttas all revolve around a stanza spoken
by the Buddha emphasising the need for present effort in
developing insight into things as they are.

135 Culakammavibhanga Sutta: The Shorter Exposition of
Action. The Buddha explains how kamma accounts for the
fortune and misfortune of beings.

136 Mahakammavibhanga Sutta: The Greater Exposition of
Action. The Buddha reveals subtle complexities in the
workings of kamma that overturn simplistic dogmas and
sweeping generalizations.

137 Salayatanavibhanga Sutta: The Exposition of the Sixfold
Base. The Buddha expounds the six internal and external
sense bases and other related topics.

138 Uddesavibhanga Sutta: The Exposition of a Summary. The
venerable Maha Kaccana elaborates upon a brief saying of
the Buddha on the training of consciousness and the over-
coming of agitation.

139 Aranavibhanga Sutta: The Exposition of Non-conflict. The
Buddha gives a detailed discourse on things that lead to
conflict and things tha}: lead away from conflict.

140 Dhdtuvibhanga Sutta: The Exposition of Elements. Stopping
at a potter's workshop for the night, the Buddha meets a
monk named Pukkusati and gives him a profound dis-
course on the elements culminating in the four foundations
of arahantship.

141 Saccavibhanga Sutta: The Exposition of the Truths. The ven-
erable Sariputta gives a detailed analysis of the Four Noble
Truths.

142 Dakkhinavibhanga Sutta: The Exposition of Offerings. The
Buddha enumerates fourteen kinds of personal offerings
and seven kinds of offerings made to the Sangha.


A Summary of the 152 Suttas 75


143 Anathapindikovada Sutta: Advice to Anathapindika. The
venerable Sariputta is called to Anathapindika's deathbed
and gives him a stirring sermon on non-attachment.

144 Channovada Sutta : Advice to Channa. The venerable
Channa, gravely ill, takes his own life despite the attempts
of two brother-monks to dissuade him.

145 Punnovada Sutta: Advice to Punna. The bhikkhu Punna
receives a short exhortation from the Buddha and decides
to go live among the fierce people of a remote territory.

146 Nandakovada Sutta: Advice from Nandaka. The venerable
Nandaka gives the nuns a discourse on impermanence.

147 CUlarahulovada Sutta: The Shorter Discourse of Advice to
Rahula. The Buddha gives Rahula a discourse that leads
him to the attainment of arahantship.

148 Chachakka Sutta: The Six Sets of Six. An especially pro-
found and penetrating discourse on the contemplation of
all the factors of sense experience as not-self.

149 Mahdsalayatanika Sutta: The Great Sixfold Base. How wrong
view about the six kinds of sense experience leads to future
bondage, while right view about them leads to liberation.

150 Nagaravindeyya Sutta: To the Nagaravindans. The Buddha
explains to a group of brahmin householders what kind of
recluses and brahmins should be venerated.

151 Pindapataparisuddhi Sutta: The Purification of Almsfood.
The Buddha teaches Sariputta how a bhikkhu should
review himself to make himself worthy of almsfood.

152 Indriyabhavana Sutta: The Development of the Faculties.
The Buddha explains the supreme development of control
over the sense faculties and the arahant's mastery over his
perceptions.



bMajjhima NikAya

The Middle Length Discourses
of the Buddha


NAMO TASSA BHAGAVATO
ARAHATO SAMMASAMBUDDHASSA

HOMAGE TO THE BLESSED ONE,
ACCOMPLISHED AND FULLY ENLIGHTENED




Part One


The Root Fifty Discourses

(MulapannasapaH)




1

The Division of the Discourse
on the Root

(Mulapariyayavagga)



1 Mulapariyaya Sutta
The Root of All Things


[1] 1. Thus have I heard. 1 On one occasion the Blessed One was
living in Ukkattha in the Subhaga Grove at the root of a royal
sala tree. There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." 2 -
"Venerable sir," they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, I shall teach you a discourse on the root of all
things. 3 Listen and attend closely to what I shall say." - "Yes,
venerable sir," the bhikkhus replied. The Blessed One said this:

(the ordinary person)

3. "Here, bhikkhus, an untaught ordinary person, 4 who has no
regard for noble ones and is unskilled and undisciplined in their
Dhamma, who has no regard for true men and is unskilled and
undisciplined in their Dhamma, perceives earth as earth. 5
Having perceived earth as earth, he conceives [himself as] earth,
he conceives [himself] in earth, he conceives [himself apart]
from earth, he conceives earth to be 'mine/ he delights in earth. 6
Why is that? Because he has not fully understood it, I say. 7

4. "He perceives water as water. Having perceived water as
water, he conceives [himself as] water, he conceives [himself] in
water, he conceives [himself apart] from water, he conceives
water to be 'mine/ he delights in water. Why is that? Because he
has not fully understood it, I say.

5. "He perceives fire as fire. Having perceived fire as fire, he
conceives [himself as] fire, he conceives [himself] in fire, he con-
ceives [himself apart] from fire, he conceives fire to be 'mine/ he
delights in fire. Why is that? Because he has not fully under-
stood it, I say.

6- "He perceives air as air. Having perceived air as air, he con-
ceives [himself as] air, he conceives [himself] in air, he conceives


84 Mulapariyaya Sutta: Sutta 1



i;

II



i 2


[himself apart] from air, he conceives air to be 'mine,' he
delights in air. Why is that? Because he has not fully understood
it, I say. [2]

7. "He perceives beings as beings. 8 Having perceived beings
as beings, he conceives beings, he conceives [himself] in beings,
he conceives [himself apart] from beings, he conceives beings to
be 'mine,' he delights in beings. Why is that? Because he has not
fully understood it, I say.

8. "He perceives gods as gods. 9 Having perceived gods as
gods, he conceives gods, he conceives [himself] in gods, he con-
ceives [himself apart] from gods, he conceives gods to be 'mine/
he delights in gods. Why is that? Because he has not fully under-
stood it, I say.

9. "He perceives Pajapati as Pajapati. 10 Having perceived
Pajapati as Pajapati, he conceives Pajapati, he conceives [him-
self] in Pajapati, he conceives [himself apart] from Pajapati, he
conceives Pajapati to be 'mine/ he delights in Pajapati. Why is
that? Because he has not fully understood it, I say.

10. "He perceives Brahma as Brahma. 11 Having perceived
Brahma as Brahma, he conceives Brahma, he conceives [himself]
in Brahma, he conceives [himself apart] from Brahma, he con-
ceives Brahma to be 'mine/ he delights in Brahma. Why is that?
Because he has not fully understood it, I say.

11. "He perceives the gods of Streaming Radiance as the gods
of Streaming Radiance. 12 Having perceived the gods of
Streaming Radiance as the gods of Streaming Radiance, he con-
ceives the gods of Streaming Radiance, he conceives [himself] in
the gods of Streaming Radiance, he conceives [himself apart]
from the gods of Streaming Radiance, he conceives the gods of
Streaming Radiance to be 'mine,' he delights in the gods of
Streaming Radiance. Why is that? Because he has not fully
understood it, I say.

12. "He perceives the gods of Refulgent Glory as the gods of
Refulgent Glory. 13 Having perceived the gods of Refulgent
Glory as the gods of Refulgent Glory, he conceives the gods of
Refulgent Glory, he conceives [himself] in the gods of Refulgent
Glory, he conceives [himself apart] from the gods of Refulgent
Glory, he conceives the gods of Refulgent Glory to be 'mine/ he
delights in the gods of Refulgent Glory. Why is that? Because he
has not fully understood it, I say.


i 3


The Root of All Things 85


13. "He perceives the gods of Great Fruit as the gods of Great
Fruit. 14 Having perceived the gods of Great Fruit as the gods of
Great Fruit, he conceives the gods of Great Fruit, he conceives
[himself] in the gods of Great Fruit, he conceives [himself apart]
from the gods of Great Fruit, he conceives the gods of Great
Fruit to be 'mine,' he delights in the gods of Great Fruit. Why is
that? Because he has not fully understood it, I say.

14. "He perceives the Overlord as the Overlord. 15 Having per-
ceived the Overlord as the Overlord, he conceives the Overlord,
he conceives [himself] in the Overlord, he conceives [himself
apart] from the Overlord, he conceives the Overlord to be
'mine/ he delights in the Overlord. Why is that? Because he has
not fully understood it, I say.

15. "He perceives the base of infinite space as the base of infi-
nite space. 16 Having perceived the base of infinite space as the
base of infinite space, he conceives [himself as] the base of infi-
nite space, he conceives [himself] in the base of infinite space, he
conceives [himself apart] from the base of infinite space, he con-
ceives the base of infinite space to be 'mine,' he delights in the
base of infinite space. Why is that? Because he has not fully
understood it, I say.

16. "He perceives the base of infinite consciousness as the
base of infinite consciousness. Having perceived the base of
infinite consciousness as the base of infinite consciousness, [3]
he conceives [himself as] the base of infinite consciousness, he
conceives [himself] in the base of infinite consciousness, he con-
ceives [himself apart] from the base of infinite consciousness, he
conceives the base of infinite consciousness to be 'mine/ he
delights in the base of infinite consciousness. Why is that?
Because he has not fully understood it, I say.

17. "He perceives the base of nothingness as the base of noth-
ingness. Having perceived the base of nothingness as the base of
nothingness, he conceives [himself as] the base of nothingness, he
conceives [himself] in the base of nothingness, he conceives [him-
self apart] from the base of nothingness, he conceives the base of
nothingness to be 'mine,' he delights in the base of nothingness.
Why is that? Because he has not fully understood it, I say.

18. "He perceives the base of neither-perception-nor-non-
perception as the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
Having perceived the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception


86 Mttlapariyaya Sutta: Sutta 1


i 3


as tiie base of neither-perception-nor -non-perception, he conceives
[himself as] the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception,
he conceives [himself] in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-
perception, he conceives [himself apart] from the base of
neither-perception-nor-non-perception, he conceives the base of
neither-perception-nor-non-perception to be 'mine/ he delights
in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception. Why is
that? Because he has not fully understood it, I say.

19. "He perceives the seen as the seen. 17 Having perceived the
seen as the seen, he conceives [himself as] the seen, he conceives
[himself] in the seen, he conceives [himself apart] from the seen,
he conceives the seen to be 'mine,' he delights in the seen. Why
is that? Because he has not fully understood it, I say.

20. "He perceives the heard as the heard. Having perceived
the heard as the heard, he conceives [himself as] the heard, he
conceives [himself] in the heard, he conceives [himself apart]
from the heard, he conceives the heard to be 'mine,' he delights
in the heard. Why is that? Because he has not fully understood
it, I say.

21. "He perceives the sensed as the sensed. Having perceived
the sensed as the sensed, he conceives [himself as] the sensed, he
conceives [himself] in the sensed, he conceives [himself apart]
from the sensed, he conceives the sensed to be 'mine,' he
delights in the sensed. Why is that? Because he has not fully
understood it, I say.

22. "He perceives the cognized as the cognized. Having per-
ceived the cognized as the ’cognized, he conceives [himself as]
the cognized, he conceives [himself] in the cognized, he con-
ceives [himself apart] from the cognized, he conceives the cog-
nized to be 'mine,' he delights in the cognized. Why is that?
Because he has not fully understood it, I say.

23. "He perceives unity as unity. 18 Having perceived unity as
unity, he conceives [himself as] unity, he conceives [himself] in
unity, he conceives [himself apart] from unity, he conceives
unity to be 'mine,' he delights in unity. Why is that? Because he
has not fully understood it, I say.

24. "He perceives diversity as diversity. Having perceived
diversity as diversity, he conceives [himself as] diversity, he
conceives [himself] in diversity, he conceives [himself apart]
from diversity, he conceives diversity to be 'mine,' he delights



i 4


The Root of All Things 87


in diversity. Why is that? Because he has not fully understood
it, I say.

25. "He perceives all as all. 19 Having perceived all as all, he
conceives [himself asl all, [4] he conceives [himself] in all, he
conceives [himself apart] from all, he conceives all to be 'mine,'
he delights in all. Why is that? Because he has not fully under-
stood it, I say.

26. "He perceives Nibbana as Nibbana. 20 Having perceived
Nibbana as Nibbana, he conceives [himself as] Nibbana, he
conceives [himself] in Nibbana, he conceives [himself apart]
from Nibbana, he conceives Nibbana to be 'mine/ he delights
in Nibbana. Why is that? Because he has not fully understood
it, I say.

(the disciple in higher training)

27. "Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who is in higher training, 21 whose
mind has not yet reached the goal, and who is still aspiring to
the supreme security from bondage, directly knows earth as
earth. 22 Having directly known earth as earth, he should not
conceive [himself as] earth, he should not conceive [himself] in
earth, he should not conceive [himself apart] from earth, he
should not conceive earth to be 'mine/ he should not delight in
earth. Why is that? So that he may fully understand it, I say. 23

28-49. "He directly knows water as water... He directly knows
all as all...

50. "He directly knows Nibbana as Nibbana. Having directly
known Nibbana as Nibbana, he should not conceive [himself as]
Nibbana, he should not conceive [himself] in Nibbana, he
should not conceive [himself apart] from Nibbana, he should
not conceive Nibbana to be 'mine/ he should not delight in
Nibbana. Why is that? So that he may fully understand it, I say.

(the arahant - 1)

51. "Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who is an arahant with taints
destroyed, who has lived the holy life, done what had to be
done, laid down the burden, reached the true goal, destroyed
the fetters of being, and is completely liberated through final
knowledge, 24 directly knows earth as earth. Having directly


known earth as earth, he does not conceive [himself as] earth, he
does not conceive [himself] in earth, he does not conceive [him-
self apart] from earth, he does not conceive earth to be 'mine/ he
does not delight in earth. Why is that? Because he has fully
understood it, I say. 25

52-74. "He directly knows water as water. ..Nibbana as
Nibbana. . .Why is that? Because he has fully understood it, I say.

(THE arahant - It)

75. "Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who is an arahant... completely liber-
ated through final knowledge, [5] directly knows earth as earth.
Having directly known earth as earth, he does not conceive [him-
self as] earth, he does not conceive [himself] in earth, he does not
conceive [himself apart] from earth, he does not conceive earth to
be 'mine/ he does not delight in earth. Why is that? Because he is
free from lust through the destruction of lust. 26

76-98. "He directly knows water as water. ..Nibbana as
Nibbana... Why is that? Because he is free from lust through the
destruction of lust.

(THE ARAHANT - III)

99. "Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who is an arahant... completely liber-
ated through final knowledge, directly knows earth as earth.
Having directly known earth as earth, he does not conceive [him-
self as] earth, he does not conceive [himself] in earth, he does not
conceive [himself apart] from earth, he does not conceive earth to
be 'mine/ he does not delight in earth. Why is that? Because he is
free from hate through the destruction of hate.

100-122. "He directly knows water as water. ..Nibbana as
Nibbana. . .Why is that? Because he is free from hate through the
destruction of hate.

(THE ARAHANT - IV)

123. "Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who is an arahant... completely liber-
ated through final knowledge, directly knows earth as earth.
Having directly known earth as earth, he does not conceive
[himself as] earth, he does not conceive [himself] in earth, he



The Root of All Things 89


i 6


does not conceive [himself apart] from earth, he does not con-
ceive earth to be 'mine,' he does not delight in earth. Why is
that? Because he is free from delusion through the destruction of
delusion.

124-146. "He directly knows water as water... Nibbana as
Nibbana. ..Why is that? Because he is free from delusion
through the destruction of delusion.

(THE TATHAGATA - 1)

147. "Bhikkhus, the Tathagata, 27 accomplished and fully enlight-
ened, directly knows earth as earth. Having directly known
earth as earth, he does not conceive [himself as] earth, he does
not conceive [himself] in earth, he does not conceive [himself
apart] from earth, he does not conceive earth to be 'mine/ he
does not delight in earth. [6] Why is that? Because the Tathagata
has fully understood it to the end, I say. 28

148-170. "He directly knows water as water... Nibbana as
Nibbana... Why is that? Because the Tathagata has fully under-
stood it to the end, I say.

(THE TATHAGATA - II)

171. "Bhikkhus, the Tathagata, accomplished and fully enlight-
ened, directly knows earth as earth. Having directly known
earth as earth, he does not conceive [himself as] earth, he does
not conceive [himself] in earth, he does not conceive [himself
apart] from earth, he does not conceive earth to be 'mine,' he
does not delight in earth. Why is that? Because he has under-
stood that delight is the root of suffering, and that with being [as
condition] there is birth, and that for whatever has come to be
there is ageing and death. 29 Therefore, bhikkhus, through the
complete destruction, fading away, cessation, giving up, and
relinquishing of cravings, the Tathagata has awakened to
supreme full enlightenment, I say. 30

172-194. "He directly knows water as water... Nibbana as
Nibbana... Why is that? Because he has understood that delight
is the root of suffering, and that with being [as condition] there is
birth, and that for whatever has come to be there is ageing and
death. Therefore, bhikkhus, through the complete destruction,


90 Mulapariyaya Sutta: Sutta 1



fading away, cessation, giving up, and relinquishing of crav-
ings, the Tathagata has awakened to supreme full enlighten-
ment, I say."

That is what the Blessed One said. But those bhikkhus did not
delight in the Blessed One's words. 31


2 Sabbasava Sutta
All the Taints


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Savatthl in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There he
addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, I shall teach you a discourse on the restraint of
all the taints. 32 [7] Listen and attend closely to what I shall say."
- "Yes, venerable sir," the bhikkhus replied. The Blessed One
said this:

(summary)

3. "Bhikkhus, I say that the destruction of the taints is for one
who knows and sees, not for one who does not know and see.
Who knows and sees what? Wise attention and unwise atten-
tion. 33 When one attends unwisely, unarisen taints arise and
arisen taints increase. When one attends wisely, unarisen taints
do not arise and arisen taints are abandoned.

4. "Bhikkhus, there are taints that should be abandoned by
seeing. There are taints that should be abandoned by restrain-
ing. There are taints that should be abandoned by using. There
are taints that should be abandoned by enduring. There are
taints that should be abandoned by avoiding. There are taints
that should be abandoned by removing. There are taints that
should be abandoned by developing. 34

(taints to be abandoned by seeing)

5. "What taints, bhikkhus, should be abandoned by seeing? 35
Here, bhikkhus, an untaught ordinary person, who has no
regard for noble ones and is unskilled and undisciplined in their


91


92 Sabbasava Sutta: Sutta 2


i 8


Dhamma, who has no regard for true men and is unskilled and
undisciplined in their Dhamma, does not understand what
things are fit for attention and what things are unfit for atten-
tion. Since that is so, he attends to those things unfit for atten-
tion and he does not attend to those things fit for attention. 36

6. "What are the things unfit for attention that he attends to?
They are things such that when he attends to them, the unarisen
taint of sensual desire arises in him and the arisen taint of
sensual desire increases, the unarisen taint of being arises in him
and the arisen taint of being increases, the unarisen taint of igno-
rance arises in him and the arisen taint of ignorance increases.
These are the things unfit for attention that he attends to. 37 And
what are the things fit for attention that he does not attend to?
They are things such that when he attends to them, the unarisen
taint of sensual desire does not arise in him and the arisen taint
of sensual desire is abandoned, the unarisen taint of being does
not arise in him and the arisen taint of being is abandoned, the
unarisen taint of ignorance does not arise in him and the arisen
taint of ignorance is abandoned. These are the things fit for
attention that he does not attend to. [8] By attending to things
unfit for attention and by not attending to things fit for atten-
tion, both unarisen taints arise in him and arisen taints increase.

7. "This is how he attends unwisely: 'Was I in the past? Was I

not in the past? What was I in the past? How was I in the past?

Having been what, what did I become in the past? Shall I be in

the future? Shall I not be in the future? What shall I be in the

*

future? How shall I be in the future? Having been what, what
shall I become in the future?' Or else he is inwardly perplexed
about the present thus: 'Am I? Am I not? What am I? How am I?
Where has this being come from? Where will it go?' 38

8. "When he attends unwisely in this way, one of six views
arises in him. 39 The view 'self exists for me' arises in him as true
and established; or the view 'no self exists for me' arises in him
as true and established; or the view 'I perceive self with self'
arises in him as true and established; or the view 'I perceive not-
self with self' arises in him as true and established; or the view 'I
perceive self with not-self ' arises in him as true and established;
or else he has some such view as this: 'It is this self of mine
that speaks and feels and experiences here and there the result
of good and bad actions; but this self of mine is permanent.


All the Taints 93


i 9

everlasting, eternal, not subject to change, and it will endure as
long as eternity.' 40 This speculative view, bhikkhus, is called the
thicket of views, the wilderness of views, the contortion of
views, the vacillation of views, the fetter of views. Fettered by
the fetter of views, the untaught ordinary person is not freed
from birth, ageing, and death, from sorrow, lamentation, pain,
grief, and despair; he is not freed from suffering, I say.

9. "Bhikkhus, a well-taught noble disciple, who has regard for
noble ones and is skilled and disciplined in their Dhamma, who
has regard for true men and is skilled and disciplined in their
Dhamma, understands what things are fit for attention and
what things are unfit for attention. Since that is so, [9] he does
not attend to those things unfit for attention and he attends to
those things fit for attention.

10. "What are the things unfit for attention that he does not
attend to? They are things such that when he attends to them,
the unarisen taint of sensual desire arises in him... (as §6 )... and
the arisen taint of ignorance increases. These are the things unfit
for attention that he does not attend to. And what are the things
fit for attention that he attends to? They are things such that
when he attends to them, the unarisen taint of sensual desire
does not arise in him. ..(as §6 ). ..and the arisen taint of ignorance
is abandoned. These are the things fit for attention that he
attends to. By not attending to things unfit for attention and by
attending to things fit for attention, unarisen taints do not arise
in him and arisen taints are abandoned.

11. "He attends wisely: 'This is suffering'; he attends wisely:
"This is the origin of suffering'; he attends wisely: 'This is the
cessation of suffering'; he attends wisely: 'This is the way lead-
ing to the cessation of suffering.' 41 When he attends wisely in
this way, three fetters are abandoned in him: personality view,
doubt, and adherence to rules and observances. These are called
the taints that should be abandoned by seeing. 42

(taints to be abandoned by restraining)

12. "What taints, bhikkhus, should be abandoned by restrain-
ing? 43 Here a bhikkhu, reflecting wisely, abides with the eye fac-
ulty restrained. While taints, vexation, and fever might arise in
one who abides with the eye faculty unrestrained, there are no


94 Sabbasava Sutta: Sutta 2


ilO


taints, vexation, or fever in one who abides with the eye faculty
restrained. 44 Reflecting wisely, he abides with the ear faculty
restrained. . .with the nose faculty restrained. . .with the tongue fac-
ulty restrained. . .with the body faculty restrained. . .with the mind
faculty restrained... While taints, vexation, and fever might arise
in one who abides with the faculties unrestrained, [10] there are
no taints, vexation, or fever in one who abides with the faculties
restrained. These are called the taints that should be abandoned
by restraining.

(taints to be abandoned by using)

13. "What taints, bhikkhus, should be abandoned by using? 45
Here a bhikkhu, reflecting wisely, uses the robe only for protec-
tion from cold, for protection from heat, for protection from con-
tact with gadflies, mosquitoes, wind, the sun, and creeping
things, and only for the purpose of concealing the private parts.

14. "Reflecting wisely, he uses almsfood neither for amusement
nor for intoxication nor for the sake of physical beauty and attrac-
tiveness, but only for the endurance and continuance of this body,
for ending discomfort, and for assisting the holy life, considering:
'Thus I shall terminate old feelings without arousing new feelings
and I shall be healthy and blameless and shall live in comfort.'

15. "Reflecting wisely, he uses the resting place only for pro-
tection from cold, for protection from heat, for protection from
contact with gadflies, mosquitoes, wind, the sun, and creeping
things, and only for the purpose of warding off the perils of cli-
mate and for enjoying retreat.

16. "Reflecting wisely, he uses the medicinal requisites only
for protection from arisen afflicting feelings and for the benefit
of good health.

17. "While taints, vexation, and fever might arise in one who
does not use the requisites thus, there are no taints, vexation, or
fever in one who uses them thus. These are called the taints that
should be abandoned by using.


J


(taints to be abandoned by enduring)

18. "What taints, bhikkhus, should be abandoned by enduring?
Here a bhikkhu, reflecting wisely, bears cold and heat, hunger and



ill


All the Taints 95


thirst, and contact with gadflies, mosquitoes, wind, the sun, and
creeping things; he endures ill-spoken, unwelcome words and
arisen bodily feelings that are painful, racking, sharp, piercing, dis-
agreeable, distressing, and menacing to life. While taints, vexation,
and fever might arise in one who does not endure such things,
there are no taints, vexation, or fever in one who endures them.
These are called the taints that should be abandoned by enduring.

(TAINTS TO BE ABANDONED BY AVOIDING)

19. "What taints, bhikkhus, should be abandoned by avoiding?
Here a bhikkhu, reflecting wisely, avoids a wild elephant, a wild
horse, a wild bull, a wild dog, a snake, a stump, [11] a bramble
patch, a chasm, a cliff, a cesspit, a sewer. Reflecting wisely, he
avoids sitting on unsuitable seats, wandering to unsuitable
resorts, 46 and associating with bad friends, since if he were to do
so wise companions in the holy life might suspect him of evil
conduct. While taints, vexation, and fever might arise in one
who does not avoid these things, there are no taints, vexation,
and fever in one who avoids them. These are called the taints
that should be abandoned by avoiding.

(TAINTS TO BE ABANDONED BY REMOVING)

20. "What taints, bhikkhus, should be abandoned by removing?
Here a bhikkhu, reflecting wisely, does not tolerate an arisen
thought of sensual desire; he abandons it, removes it, does away
with it, and annihilates it. He does not tolerate an arisen thought
of ill will. ..He does not tolerate an arisen thought of
cruelty... He does not tolerate arisen evil unwholesome states; he
abandons them, removes them, does away with them, and anni-
hilates them. 47 While taints, vexation, and fever might arise in
one who does not remove these thoughts, there are no taints,
vexation, or fever in one who removes them. These are called
the taints that should be abandoned by removing.

(TAINTS TO BE ABANDONED BY DEVELOPING)

21. "What taints, bhikkhus, should be abandoned by developing?
Here a bhikkhu, reflecting wisely, develops the mindfulness


96 SabbSsava Sutta: Sutta 2


i 12


enlightenment factor, which is supported by seclusion, dispas-
sion, and cessation, and ripens in relinquishment. He develops
the investigation-of-states enlightenment factor... the energy
enlightenment factor... the rapture enlightenment factor... the
tranquillity enlightenment factor... the concentration enlighten-
ment factor. ..the equanimity enlightenment factor, which is
supported by seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, and ripens in
relinquishment. 48 While taints, vexation, and fever might arise
in one who does not develop these enlightenment factors, there
are no taints, vexation, or fever in one who develops them.
These are called the taints that should be abandoned by devel-
oping. 49

(conclusion)

22. "Bhikkhus, when for a bhikkhu the taints that should be
abandoned by seeing have been abandoned by seeing, when the
taints that should be abandoned by restraining have been aban-
doned by restraining, when the taints that should be abandoned
by using have been abandoned by using, when the taints that
should be abandoned by enduring have been abandoned by
enduring, when the taints that should be abandoned by avoid-
ing [12] have been abandoned by avoiding, when the taints that
should be abandoned by removing have been abandoned by
removing, when the taints that should be abandoned by devel-
oping have been abandonee] by developing - then he is called a
bhikkhu who dwells restrained with the restraint of all the taints.
He has severed craving, flung off the fetters, and with the com-
plete penetration of conceit he has made an end of suffering/' 50

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.



3 Dhammadayada Sutta
Heirs in Dhamma


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing in Savatthl in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There he
addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." 51 - "Venerable sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, be my heirs in Dhamma, not my heirs in material
things. Out of compassion for you I have thought: 'How shall
my disciples be my heirs in Dhamma, not my heirs in material
things?' If you are my heirs in material tilings, not my heirs in
Dhamma, you will be reproached thus: "The Teacher's disciples
live as his heirs in material things, not as heirs in Dhamma'; and
I will be reproached thus: 'The Teacher's disciples live as his
heirs in material things, not as his heirs in Dhamma.'

"If you are my heirs in Dhamma, not my heirs in material
things, you will not be reproached [as it will be said]: 'The
Teacher's disciples live as his heirs in Dhamma, not as his heirs
in material things'; and I will not be reproached [as it will be
said]: 'The Teacher's disciples live as his heirs in Dhamma, not
as his heirs in material things.' Therefore, bhikkhus, be my heirs
in Dhamma, not my heirs in material things. Out of compassion
for you I have thought: 'How shall my disciples be my heirs in
Dhamma, not my heirs in material things?'

3. "Now, bhikkhus, suppose that I had eaten, refused more
food, had my fill, finished, had enough, had what I needed, and
some almsfood was left over to be thrown away. Then two
bhikkhus arrived [13] hungry and weak, and I told them:
'Bhikkhus, I have eaten... had what I needed, but there is this
almsfood of mine left over to be thrown away. Eat if you like; if
you do not eat then I shall throw it away where there is no
greenery or drop it into water where there is no life.' Then one
bhikkhu thought: 'The Blessed One has eaten... had what he


97


98 Dhammadayada Sutta: Sutta 3


i 14


needed, but there is this almsfood of the Blessed One left over to
be thrown away; if we do not eat it the Blessed One will throw it
away. . .But this has been said by the Blessed One: "Bhikkhus, be
my heirs in Dhamma, not my heirs in material things." Now this
almsfood is one of the material things. Suppose that instead of
eating this almsfood I pass the night and day hungry and weak.'
And instead of eating that almsfood he passed that night and day
hungry and weak. Then the second bhikkhu thought: 'The Blessed
One has eaten. . .had what he needed, but there is this almsfood of
the Blessed One left over to be thrown away. . .Suppose that I eat
this almsfood and pass the night and day neither hungry nor
weak.' And after eating that almsfood he passed the night and
day neither hungry nor weak. Now although that bhikkhu by
eating that almsfood passed the night and day neither hungry
nor weak, yet the first bhikkhu is more to be respected and com-
mended by me. Why is that? Because that will for long conduce
to his fewness of wishes, contentment, effacement, easy support,
and arousal of energy. 52 Therefore, bhikkhus, be my heirs in
Dhamma, not my heirs in material things. Out of compassion for
you I have thought: 'How shall my disciples be my heirs in
Dhamma, not my heirs in material things?'"

4. That is what the Blessed One said. Having said this, the
Sublime One rose from his seat and went into his dwelling. Soon
after he had left, the venerable Sariputta addressed the bhikkhus
thus: "Friends, bhikkhus." - "Friend," they replied. [14] The
venerable Sariputta said this:

5. "Friends, in what way do disciples of the Teacher who lives
secluded not train in seclusion? And in what way do disciples of
the Teacher who lives secluded train in seclusion?"

"Indeed, friend, we would come from far away to learn from
the venerable Sariputta the meaning of this statement. It would
be good if the venerable Sariputta would explain the meaning of
this statement. Having heard it from him the bhikkhus will
remember it."

"Then, friends, listen and attend closely to what I shall say."

"Yes, friend," the bhikkhus replied. The venerable Sariputta
said this:

6. "Friends, in what way do disciples of the Teacher who lives
secluded not train in seclusion? Here disciples of the Teacher who
lives secluded do not train in seclusion; they do not abandon



i 15


Heirs in Dhamma 99


what the Teacher tells them to abandon; they are luxurious and
careless, leaders in backsliding, neglectful of seclusion.

"In this the elder bhikkhus are to be blamed for three rea-
sons. 53 As disciples of the Teacher who lives secluded they do
not train in seclusion: they are to be blamed for this first reason.
They do not abandon what the Teacher tells them to abandon:
they are to be blamed for this second reason. They are luxurious
and careless, leaders in backsliding, neglectful of seclusion: they
are to be blamed for this third reason. The elder bhikkhus are to
be blamed for these three reasons.

"In this the middle bhikkhus are to be blamed for three rea-
sons. As disciples of the Teacher who lives secluded they do not
train in seclusion: they are to be blamed for this first reason.
They do not abandon what the Teacher tells them to abandon:
they are to be blamed for this second reason. They are luxurious
and careless, leaders in backsliding, neglectful of seclusion: they
are to be blamed for this third reason. The middle bhikkhus are
to be blamed for these three reasons.

"In this the new bhikkhus are to be blamed for three reasons.
As disciples of the Teacher who lives secluded they do not train
in seclusion: they are to be blamed for this first reason. They do
not abandon what the Teacher tells them to abandon: they are to
be blamed for this second reason. They are luxurious and care-
less, leaders in backsliding, neglectful of seclusion: they are to be
blamed for this third reason. The new bhikkhus are to be
blamed for these three reasons.

"It is in this way that disciples of the Teacher who lives
secluded do not train in seclusion.

7. "In what way, friends, do disciples of the Teacher who
lives secluded [15] train in seclusion? Here disciples of the
Teacher who lives secluded train in seclusion; they abandon
what the Teacher tells them to abandon; they are not luxurious
and careless, they are keen to avoid backsliding, and are leaders
in seclusion.

"In this the elder bhikkhus are to be commended for three
reasons. As disciples of the Teacher who lives secluded they
train in seclusion: they are to be commended for this first rea-
son. They abandon what the Teacher tells them to abandon:
they are to be commended for this second reason. They are not
luxurious and careless; they are keen to avoid backsliding and



100 Dhammadayada Sutta: Sutta 3


i 16


are leaders in seclusion: they are to be commended for this
third reason. The elder bhikkhus are to be commended for
these three reasons.

"In this the middle bhikkhus are to be commended for three
reasons. As disciples of the Teacher who lives secluded they
train in seclusion: they are to be commended for this first rea-
son. They abandon what the Teacher tells them to abandon: they
are to be commended for this second reason. They are not luxu-
rious and careless; they are keen to avoid backsliding and are
leaders in seclusion: they are to be commended for this third
reason. The middle bhikkhus are to be commended for these
three reasons.

"In this the new bhikkhus are to be commended for three
reasons. As disciples of the Teacher who lives secluded they
train in seclusion: they are to be commended for this first rea-
son. They abandon what the Teacher tells them to abandon:
they are to be commended for this second reason. They are not
luxurious and careless; they are keen to avoid backsliding and
are leaders in seclusion: they are to be commended for this
third reason. The new bhikkhus are to be commended for these
three reasons.

"It is in this way that disciples of the Teacher who lives
secluded train in seclusion.

8. "Friends, the evil herein is greed and hate. 54 There is a
Middle Way for the abandoning of greed and hate, giving
vision, giving knowledge, which leads to peace, to direct knowl-
edge, to enlightenment, to Nibbana. And what is that Middle
Way? It is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view,
right intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right
effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration. This is the
Middle Way giving vision, giving knowledge, which leads to
peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to Nibbana. 55

9-15. "The evil herein is anger and revenge... contempt and a
domineering attitude... envy and avarice... deceit and fraud... ob-
stinacy [16] and presumption... conceit and arrogance... vanity
and negligence. There is a Middle Way for the abandoning of
vanity and negligence, giving vision, giving knowledge, which
leads to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to
Nibbana. And what is that Middle Way? It is just this Noble
Eightfold Path; that is, right view, right intention, right speech.


Heirs in Dhamma 101

right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and
right concentration. This is the Middle Way giving vision, giv-
ing knowledge, which leads to peace, to direct knowledge, to
enlightenment, to Nibbana."

That is what the venerable Sariputta said. The bhikkhus were
satisfied and delighted in the venerable Sariputta's words.




4 Bhayabherava Sutta
Fear and Dread


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.

2. Then the brahmin Janussoni 56 went to the Blessed One and
exchanged greetings with him. When this courteous and ami-
able talk was finished, he sat down at one side and said: "Master
Gotama, when clansmen have gone forth from the home life into
homelessness out of faith in Master Gotama, do they have
Master Gotama for their leader, their helper, and their guide?
And do these people follow the example of Master Gotama?" 57

"That is so, brahmin, that is so. When clansmen have gone
forth from the home life into homelessness out of faith in me,
they have me for their leader, their helper, and their guide. And
these people follow my example."

"But, Master Gotama, remote jungle-thicket resting places in
the forest are hard to endure, seclusion is hard to practise, and it
is hard to enjoy solitude. One would think the jungles must rob
a bhikkhu of his mind, if hd has no concentration." [17]

"That is so, brahmin, that is so. Remote jungle-thicket resting
places in the forest are hard to endure, seclusion is hard to prac-
tise, and it is hard to enjoy solitude. One would think the jungles
must rob a bhikkhu of his mind, if he has no concentration.

3. "Before my enlightenment, while I was still only an unen-
lightened Bodhisatta, I too considered thus: 'Remote jungle-thick-
et resting places in the forest are hard to endure... the jungles
must rob a bhikkhu of his mind, if he has no concentration.'

4. "I considered thus: 'Whenever recluses or brahmins unpuri-
fied in bodily conduct resort to remote jungle-thicket resting
places in the forest, then owing to the defect of their unpurified
bodily conduct these good recluses and brahmins evoke
unwholesome fear and dread. But I do not resort to remote jun-


102


i 20


Fear and Dread 103


gle-thicket resting places in the forest unpurified in bodily con-
duct. I am purified in bodily conduct. I resort to remote jungle-
thicket resting places in the forest as one of the noble ones with
bodily conduct purified.' Seeing in myself this purity of bodily
conduct, I found great solace in dwelling in the forest.

5-7. "I considered thus: 'Whenever recluses or brahmins unpu-
rified in verbal conduct...unpurified in mental conduct... unpuri-
fied in livelihood resort to remote jungle-thicket resting places in
the forest.. .they evoke unwholesome fear and dread. But... I am
purified in livelihood. I resort to remote jungle-thicket resting
places in the forest as one of the noble ones with livelihood puri-
fied.' Seeing in myself this purity of livelihood, I found great
solace in dwelling in the forest.

8. "I considered thus: 'Whenever recluses or brahmins who
are covetous and full of lust. . .1 am uncovetous. . .' [18]

9. "'...with a mind of ill will and intentions of hate... I have a
mind of loving-kindness . . . '

10. "'...overcome by sloth and torpor... I am without sloth and
torpor...'

11. "'...overcome with restless and unpeaceful mind. ..I have a
peaceful mind...'

12. .uncertain and doubting. . .1 have gone beyond doubt.

13. '"[19] . . . given to self-praise and disparagement of others. . .1
am not given to self-praise and disparagement of others . . . '

14. '". . .subject to alarm and terror. . .1 am free from trepidation. . .'

15. "'...desirous of gain, honour, and renown. ..I have few
wishes...'

16. .lazy and wanting in energy. . .1 am energetic. . .'

17. '"...[20] unmindful and not fully aware... I am established
in mindfulness . . . '

18. "'...unconcentrated and with straying minds. ..I am pos-
sessed of concentration...'

19. "I considered thus: 'Whenever recluses or brahmins devoid
of wisdom, drivellers, resort to remote jungle-thicket resting
places in the forest, then owing to the defect of their being
devoid of wisdom and drivellers these good recluses and brah-
mins evoke unwholesome fear and dread. But I do not resort to
remote jungle-thicket resting places in the forest devoid of wis-
dom, a driveller. I am possessed of wisdom. 58 I resort to remote
jungle-thicket resting places in the forest as one of the noble


104 Bhayabherava Sutta: Sutta 4


i 21


ones possessed of wisdom.' Seeing in myself this possession of
wisdom, I found great solace in dwelling in the forest.

20. "I considered thus: 'There are the specially auspicious
nights of the fourteenth, the fifteenth, and the eighth of the fort-
night. 59 Now what if, on such nights as these, I were to dwell in
such awe-inspiring, horrifying abodes as orchard shrines, wood-
land shrines, and tree shrines? Perhaps I might encounter that
fear and dread.' And later, on such specially auspicious nights
as the fourteenth, the fifteenth, and the eighth of the fortnight, I
dwelt in such awe-inspiring, horrifying abodes as orchard
shrines, woodland shrines, and tree shrines. And while I dwelt
there, a wild animal would come up to me, or a peacock [21]
would knock off a branch, or the wind would rustle the leaves. I
thought: 'What now if this is the fear and dread coming?' I
thought: 'Why do I dwell always expecting fear and dread?
What if I subdue that fear and dread while keeping the same
posture that I am in when it comes upon me?' 60

"While I walked, the fear and dread came upon me; I neither
stood nor sat nor lay down till I had subdued that fear and
dread. While I stood, the fear and dread came upon me; I nei-
ther walked nor sat nor lay down till I had subdued that fear
and dread. While I sat, the fear and dread came upon me; I nei-
ther walked nor stood nor lay down till I had subdued that fear
and dread. While I lay down, the fear and dread came upon me;
I neither walked nor stood nor sat down till I had subdued that
fear and dread.

21. "There are, brahmin 1 , some recluses and brahmins who
perceive day when it is night and night when it is day. I say that
on their part this is an abiding in delusion. But I perceive night
when it is night and day when it is day. Rightly speaking, were
it to be said of anyone: 'A being not subject to delusion has
appeared in the world for the welfare and happiness of many,
out of compassion for the world, for the good, welfare, and hap-
piness of gods and humans,' it is of me indeed that rightly
speaking this should be said.

22. "Tireless energy was aroused in me and unremitting
mindfulness was established, my body was tranquil and untrou-
bled, my mind concentrated and unified. 61

23. "Quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unwholesome states, I entered upon and abided in the first


i 22


Fear and Dread 1 05


jhana, which is accompanied by applied and sustained thought,
with rapture and pleasure bom of seclusion. 62

24. "With the stilling of applied and sustained thought, I
entered upon and abided in the second jhana, which has self-
confidence and singleness of mind [22] without applied and sus-
tained thought, with rapture and pleasure bom of concentration.

25. "With the fading away as well of rapture, I abided in equa-
nimity, and mindful and fully aware, still feeling pleasure with
the body, I entered upon and abided in the third jhana, on
account of which noble ones announce: 'He has a pleasant abid-
ing who has equanimity and is mindful.'

26. "With the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the
previous disappearance of joy and grief, I entered upon and
abided in the fourth jhana, which has neither-pain-nor-pleasure
and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.

27. "When my concentrated mind was thus purified, bright,
unblemished, rid of imperfection, malleable, wieldy, steady, and
attained to imperturbability, I directed it to knowledge of the rec-
ollection of past lives. 63 I recollected my manifold past lives, that
is, one birth, two births, three births, four births, five births, ten
births, twenty births, thirty births, forty births, fifty births, a hun-
dred births, a thousand births, a hundred thousand births, many
aeons of world-contraction, many aeons of world-expansion,
many aeons of world-contraction and expansion: 'There I was so
named, of such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my
nutriment, such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my
life-term; and passing away from there, I reappeared elsewhere;
and there too I was so named, of such a clan, with such an
appearance, such was my nutriment, such my experience of
pleasure and pain, such my life-term; and passing away from
there, I reappeared here.' Thus with their aspects and particulars
I recollected my manifold past lives.

28. "This was the first true knowledge attained by me in the
first watch of the night. Ignorance was banished and true
knowledge arose, darkness was banished and light arose, as
happens in one who abides diligent, ardent, and resolute.

29. "When my concentrated mind was thus purified, bright,
unblemished, rid of imperfection, malleable, wieldy, steady, and
attained to imperturbability, I directed it to knowledge of the
passing away and reappearance of beings. 64 With the divine eye,


106 Bhayabherava Sutta: Sutta 4


i 23


which is purified and surpasses the human, I saw beings pass-
ing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and ugly,
fortunate and unfortunate. I understood how beings pass on
according to their actions thus: 'These worthy beings who were
ill-conducted in body, speech, and mind, revilers of noble ones,
wrong in their views, giving effect to wrong view in their
actions, on the dissolution of the body, after death, have reap-
peared in a state of deprivation, in a bad destination, in perdition,
even in hell; but these worthy beings who were well-conducted
in body, [23] speech, and mind, not revilers of noble ones, right
in their views, giving effect to right view in their actions, on the
dissolution of the body, after death, have reappeared in a good
destination, even in the heavenly world.' Thus with the divine
eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, I saw beings
passing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and
ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and I understood how beings
pass on according to their actions.

30. "This was the second true knowledge attained by me in
the second watch of the night. Ignorance was banished and true
knowledge arose, darkness was banished and light arose, as
happens in one who abides diligent, ardent, and resolute.

31. "When my concentrated mind was thus purified, bright,
unblemished, rid of imperfection, malleable, wieldy, steady, and
attained to imperturbability, I directed it to knowledge of the
destruction of the taints. I directly knew as it actually is: 'This is
suffering'; I directly knew as it actually is: 'This is the origin of
suffering'; I directly knew as it actually is: 'This is the cessation of
suffering'; I directly knew as it actually is: "This is the way lead-
ing to the cessation of suffering.' I directly knew as it actually is:
'These are the taints'; I directly knew as it actually is: 'This is the
origin of the taints'; I directly knew as it actually is: "This is the
cessation of the taints'; I directly knew as it actually is: 'This is
the way leading to the cessation of the taints.' 65

32. "When I knew and saw thus, my mind was liberated from
the taint of sensual desire, from the taint of being, and from the
taint of ignorance. When it was liberated, there came the knowl-
edge: 'It is liberated.' 66 I directly knew: 'Birth is destroyed, the
holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done,
there is no more coming to any state of being.' 67


i 24


Fear and Dread 107


33. "This was the third true knowledge attained by me in the
third watch of the night. Ignorance was banished and true
knowledge arose, darkness was banished and light arose, as
happens in one who abides diligent, ardent, and resolute.

34. "Now, brahmin, it might be that you think: 'Perhaps the
recluse Gotama is not free from lust, hate, and delusion even
today, which is why he still resorts to remote jungle-thicket rest-
ing places in the forest.' But you should not think thus. It is
because I see two benefits that I still resort to remote jungle-thicket
resting places in the forest: I see a pleasant abiding for myself
here and now, and I have compassion for future generations." 68

35. "Indeed, it is because Master Gotama is an Accomplished
One, a Fully Enlightened One, that he has compassion for future
generations. [24] Magnificent, Master Gotama! Magnificent,
Master Gotama! Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in
many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been
overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to
one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those
with eyesight to see forms. I go to Master Gotama for refuge and
to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus. From today let
Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone to
him for refuge for life."



5 Anangana Sutta
Without Blemishes


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There the
venerable Sariputta addressed the bhikkhus thus. "Friends,
bhikkhus." - "Friend," they replied. The venerable Sariputta
said this:

2. "Friends, there are these four kinds of persons found exist-
ing in the world. 69 What four? Here some person with a blem-
ish does not understand it as it actually is thus: T have a blem-
ish in myself.' Here some person with a blemish understands it
as it actually is thus: T have a blemish in myself/ Here some
person with no blemish does not understand it as it actually is
thus: T have no blemish in myself.' Here some person with no
blemish understands it as it actually is thus: 'I have no blemish
in myself.'

"Herein, the person with a blemish who does not understand
it as it actually is thus: 'I have a blemish in myself' is called the
inferior of these two persons with a blemish. Herein, the person
with a blemish who understands it as it actually is thus: 'I have a
blemish in myself' is called the superior of these two persons
with a blemish.

"Herein, the person with no blemish [25] who does not under-
stand it as it actually is thus: 'I have no blemish' is called the
inferior of these two persons with no blemish. Herein, the per-
son with no blemish who understands it as it actually is thus: 'I
have no blemish' is called the superior of these two persons with
no blemish."

3. When this was said, the venerable Maha Moggallana asked
the venerable Sariputta: "Friend Sariputta, what is the cause and
reason why, of these two persons with a blemish, one is called
the inferior man and one is called the superior man? What is the


108


Without Blemishes 109


f I


cause and reason why, of these two persons with no blemish, one
is called the inferior man and one is called the superior man?"

4. "Herein, friend, when a person with a blemish does not
understand it as it actually is thus: 'I have a blemish in myself/
it can be expected that he will not arouse zeal, make effort, or
instigate energy to abandon that blemish, and that he will die
with lust, hate, and delusion, with a blemish, with mind defiled.
Suppose a bronze dish were brought from a shop or a smithy
covered with dirt and stains, and the owners neither used it nor
had it cleaned but put it away in a dusty corner. Would the
bronze dish thus get more defiled and stained later on?" - "Yes,
friend." - "So too, friend, when a person with a blemish does
not understand it as it actually is thus: 'I have a blemish in
myself,' it can be expected . . .that he will die. . .with mind defiled.

5. "Herein, when a person with a blemish understands it as it
actually is thus: 'I have a blemish in myself/ it can be expected
that he will arouse zeal, make effort, and instigate energy to
abandon that blemish, and that he will die without lust, hate,
and delusion, without blemish, with mind undefiled. Suppose a
bronze dish were brought from a shop or a smithy covered with
dirt and stains, and the owners had it cleaned and did not put it
in a dusty corner. [26] Would the bronze dish thus get cleaner
and brighter later on?" - "Yes, friend." - "So too, friend, when a
person with a blemish understands it as it actually is thus: 'I
have a blemish in myself/ it can be expected... that he will
die. . .with mind undefiled.

6. "Herein, when a person with no blemish does not under-
stand it as it actually is thus: 'I have no blemish in myself/ it can
be expected that he will give attention to the sign of the beauti-
ful, 70 that by his doing so lust will infect his mind, and that he
will die with lust, hate, and delusion, with a blemish, with mind
defiled. Suppose a bronze dish were brought from a shop or
smithy clean and bright, and the owners neither used it nor had
it cleaned but put it in a dusty corner. Would the bronze dish
thus get more defiled and more stained later on?" - "Yes,
friend." - "So too, friend, when a person with no blemish does
not understand it as it actually is thus: 'I have no blemish in
myself/ it can be expected that he will die. . .with mind defiled.

7. "Herein, when a person with no blemish understands it as it
actually is thus: 'I have no blemish in myself, ' it can be expected



110 Anangana Sutta: Sutta 5


i 27


that he will not give attention to the sign of the beautiful, that by
his not doing so lust will not infect his mind, and that he will die
without lust, hate, and delusion, without blemish, with mind
undefiled. Suppose a bronze dish were brought from a shop or
smithy clean and bright, and the owners used it and had it
cleaned and did not put it in a dusty corner. Would the bronze
dish thus get cleaner and brighter later on?" - "Yes, friend." -
"So too, friend, when a person with no blemish understands it
as it actually is thus: 'I have no blemish in myself/ it can be
expected. . .that he will die. . .with mind undefiled. [27]

8. "This is the cause and reason why, of these two persons
with a blemish, one is called the inferior man and one is called
the superior man. This is the cause and reason why, of these two
persons with no blemish, one is called the inferior man and one
is called the superior man.

9. "'Blemish, blemish,' is said, friend, but what is this word
'blemish' a term for? 'Blemish/ friend, is a term for the spheres
of evil unwholesome wishes.

10. "It is possible that a bhikkhu here might wish: 'If I commit
an offence, let the bhikkhus not know that I have committed an
offence.’ And it is possible that the bhikkhus come to know that
that bhikkhu has committed an offence. So he is angry and bitter
thus: 'The bhikkhus know I have committed an offence.' The
anger and bitterness are both a blemish.

11. "It is possible that a bhikkhu here might wish: 'I have com-
mitted an offence. The bhikkhus should admonish me in private,
not in the midst of the Sa’ngha.' And it is possible that the
bhikkhus admonish that bhikkhu in the midst of the Sangha, not
in private. So he is angry and bitter thus: 'The bhikkhus admon-
ish me in the midst of the Sangha, not in private.' The anger and
bitterness are both a blemish.

12. "It is possible that a bhikkhu here might wish: 'I have
committed an offence. A person who is my equal should
admonish me, not a person who is not my equal.' And it is pos-
sible that a person not his equal admonishes him, not a person
his equal. So he is angry and bitter thus: 'A person not my
equal admonishes me, not a person my equal.' The anger and
bitterness are both a blemish.

13. "It is possible that a bhikkhu here might wish: 'Oh that the
Teacher might teach the Dhamma to the bhikkhus by asking a


Without Blem ishes 111


i 30

series of questions of me, not of some other bhikkhu!' And it is
possible that the Teacher teaches the Dhamma to the bhikkhus
By asking a series of questions of some other bhikkhu, [28] not
of that bhikkhu. So he is angry and bitter thus: 'The Teacher
teaches the Dhamma to the bhikkhus by asking a series of ques-
tions of some other bhikkhu, not of me.' The anger and bitter-
ness are both a blemish.

14. "It is possible that a bhikkhu here might wish: 'Oh that the
bhikkhus might enter the village for alms putting me in the fore-
front, not some other bhikkhu!' And it is possible that the
bhikkhus enter the village for alms putting some other bhikkhu in
the forefront, not that bhikkhu. So he is angry and bitter thus: 'The
bhikkhus enter the village for alms putting some other bhikkhu in
the forefront, not me.' The anger and bitterness are both a blemish.

15. "It is possible that a bhikkhu here might wish: 'Oh that I
might get the best seat, the best water, the best almsfood in the
refectory, not some other bhikkhu!' And it is possible that some
other bhikkhu gets the best seat. . .

16. "It is possible that a bhikkhu here might wish: 'Oh that I
might give the blessing in the refectory after the meal, not some
other bhikkhu!' And it is possible that some other bhikkhu gives
the blessing. . .

17-20. "It is possible that a bhikkhu here might wish: 'Oh that I
might teach the Dhamma to the bhikkhus. . .that I might teach the
Dhamma to the bhikkhunls. . .men lay followers. . .women lay fol-
lowers... visiting the monastery, not some other bhikkhu!' And it
is possible that some other bhikkhu teaches the Dhamma [29]. . .

21-24. "It is possible that a bhikkhu here might wish: 'Oh that
the bhikkhus... bhikkhurus... men lay followers... women lay fol-
lowers... might honour, respect, revere, and venerate me, not
some other bhikkhu!' And it is possible that they honour... some
other bhikkhu. . .

25-28. "It is possible that a bhikkhu here might wish: 'Oh that
I might be the one to get a superior robe, [30]... superior alms-
food. ..a superior resting place... superior medicinal requi-
sites... not some other bhikkhu!' And it is possible that some
other bhikkhu is the one to get superior medicinal requisites, not
that bhikkhu. So he is angry and bitter thus: 'Another bhikkhu is
the one to get superior medicinal requisites, not me.' The anger
and the bitterness are both a blemish.


112 Anangana Sutta: Sutta 5


i 31


"'Blemish/ friend, is a term for the spheres of these evil
unwholesome wishes.

29. "If the spheres of these evil unwholesome wishes are seen
and heard to be unabandoned in any bhikkhu, then for all he
may be a forest dweller, a frequenter of remote abodes, an
almsfood eater, a house-to-house seeker, a refuse-rag wearer, a
wearer of rough robes, 71 still his fellows in the holy life do not
honour, respect, revere, and venerate him. Why is that? Because
the spheres of these evil unwholesome wishes are seen and
heard to be unabandoned in that venerable one.

"Suppose a metal bowl were brought from a shop or a smithy
clean and bright; and the owners put the carcass of a snake or a
dog or a human being in it and, covering it with another bowl,
went back to the market; then people seeing it said: 'What is that
you are carrying about like a treasure?' Then, raising the lid and
uncovering it, they looked in, and as soon as they saw they were
inspired with such loathing, repugnance, and disgust that even
those who were hungry would not want to eat, not to speak of
those who were full.

"So too, if the spheres of these evil unwholesome wishes are
seen and heard to be unabandoned in any bhikkhu, then for
all he may be a forest dweller. ..[31], ..unabandoned in that
venerable one.

30. "If the spheres of these evil unwholesome wishes are seen
and heard to be abandoned in any bhikkhu, then for all he may
be a village dweller, an acceptor of invitations, a wearer of robes
given him by householders, 72 yet his fellows in the holy life hon-
our, respect, revere, and venerate him. Why is that? Because the
spheres of these evil unwholesome wishes are seen and heard to
be abandoned in that venerable one.

"Suppose a metal bowl were brought from a shop or a smithy
clean and bright; and the owners put clean boiled rice and vari-
ous soups and sauces into it, and, covering it with another bowl,
went back to the market; then people seeing it said: 'What is that
you are carrying about like a treasure?' Then raising the lid and
uncovering it, they looked in, and as soon as they saw they were
inspired with such liking, appetite, and relish that even those
who were full would want to eat, not to speak of those who
were hungry.


i 32


Without Blemishes 113


"So too, friend, if the spheres of these evil unwholesome wishes
are seen and heard to be abandoned in any bhikkhu, then for all
he may be a village dweller. . .abandoned in that venerable one."

31. When this was said, the venerable Maha Moggallana said
to the venerable Sariputta: "A simile occurs to me, friend
Sariputta." - "State it, friend Moggallana." - "On one occasion,
friend, I was living at the Hill Fort at Rajagaha. Then, when it
was morning, I dressed, and taking my bowl and outer robe, I
went into Rajagaha for alms. Now on that occasion Samlti the
Cartwright's son was planing a felloe and the Ajlvaka Pandu-
putta, son of a former cartwright, was standing by. 73 Then this
thought arose in the Ajlvaka Panduputta's mind: 'Oh that this
Samlti the Cartwright's son might plane this bend, this twist, this
fault, out of the felloe so that it would be without bends, twists,
or faults, and come to consist purely of heartwood.' [32] And
just as this thought came to pass in his mind, so did Samlti the
Cartwright's son plane that bend, that twist, that fault, out of the
felloe. Then the Ajlvaka Panduputta, son of a former cartwright,
was glad and he voiced his gladness thus: 'He planes just as if
he knew my heart with his heart!'

32. "So too, friend, there are persons who are faithless and
have gone forth from the home life into homelessness not out of
faith but seeking a livelihood, who are fraudulent, deceitful,
treacherous, haughty, hollow, personally vain, rough-tongued,
loose-spoken, unguarded in their sense faculties, immoderate in
eating, undevoted to wakefulness, unconcerned with recluseship,
not greatly respectful of training, luxurious, careless, leaders in
backsliding, neglectful of seclusion, lazy, wanting in energy,
unmindful, not fully aware, unconcentrated, with straying
minds, devoid of wisdom, drivellers. The venerable Sariputta
with his discourse on the Dhamma planes out their faults just as
if he knew my heart with his heart! 74

"But there are clansmen who have gone forth out of faith
from the home life into homelessness, who are not fraudulent,
deceitful, treacherous, haughty, hollow, personally vain, rough-
tongued, or loose-spoken; who are guarded in their sense facul-
ties, moderate in eating, devoted to wakefulness, concerned with
recluseship, greatly respectful of training, not luxurious or care-
less, who are keen to avoid backsliding, leaders in seclusion.


I


114 Anangana Sulfa: Sulfa 5


i 32


energetic, resolute, established in mindfulness, fully aware,
concentrated, with unified minds, possessing wisdom, not driv-
ellers. These, on hearing the venerable Sariputta's discourse on
the Dhamma, drink it in and eat it, as it were, by word and
thought. Good indeed it is that he makes his fellows in the holy
life emerge from the unwholesome and establish themselves in
the wholesome.

33. "Just as a woman - or a man - young, youthful, fond of
adornments, with head bathed, having received a garland of
lotuses, jasmine, or roses, would take it with both hands and
place it on the head, so too there are clansmen who have gone
forth out of faith... not drivellers. These, on hearing the vener-
able Sariputta's discourse on the Dhamma, drink it in and eat it,
as it were, by word and thought. Good indeed it is that he
makes his fellows in the holy life emerge from the unwholesome
and establish themselves in the wholesome."

Thus it was that these two great beings rejoiced in each other's
good words. 75


6 Akankheyya Sutta
If a Bhikkhu Should Wish


[33] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was
living at Savatthl in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There
he addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, dwell possessed of virtue, possessed of the
Patimokkha, restrained with the restraint of the Patimokkha,
perfect in conduct and resort, and seeing fear in the slightest
fault, train by undertaking the training precepts. 76

3. "If a bhikkhu should wish: 'May I be dear and agreeable to
my companions in the holy life, respected and esteemed by
them/ let him fulfil the precepts, be devoted to internal serenity
of mind, not neglect meditation, be possessed of insight, and
dwell in empty huts. 77

4. "If a bhikkhu should wish: 'May I be one to obtain robes,
almsfood, resting place, and medicinal requisites/ let him fulfil
the precepts...

5. "If a bhikkhu should wish: 'May the services of those whose
robes, almsfood, resting place, and medicinal requisites I use
bring them great fruit and benefit,' let him fulfil the precepts. . .

6. "If a bhikkhu should wish: 'When my kinsmen and relatives
who have passed away and died remember me with confidence
in their minds, may that bring them great fruit and great bene-
fit/ let him fulfil the precepts. . . 78

7. "If a bhikkhu should wish: 'May I become a conqueror of
discontent and delight, and may discontent and delight not con-
quer me; may I abide transcending discontent and delight
whenever they arise/ let him fulfil the precepts...

8. "If a bhikkhu should wish: 'May I become a conqueror of
fear and dread, and may fear and dread not conquer me; may I


116 Akankheyya Sutta: Sutta 6


i 34


abide transcending fear and dread whenever they arise/ let him
fulfil the precepts. . .

9. "If a bhikkhu should wish: 'May I become one to obtain at
will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhanas that constitute
the higher mind and provide a pleasant abiding here and now/
let him fulfil the precepts. . .

10. "If a bhikkhu should wish: 'May I contact with the body
and abide in those liberations that are peaceful and immaterial,
transcending forms,' let him fulfil the precepts... [34] 79

11. "If a bhikkhu should wish: 'May I, with the destruction of
three fetters, become a stream-enterer, no longer subject to
perdition, bound [for deliverance], headed for enlightenment/
let him fulfil the precepts... 80

12. "If a bhikkhu should wish: 'May I, with the destruction of
three fetters and with the attenuation of lust, hate, and delusion,
become a once-returner, returning once to this world to make an
end of suffering,' let him fulfil the precepts. . .

13. "If a bhikkhu should wish: 'May I, with the destruction of
the five lower fetters, become due to reappear spontaneously [in
the Pure Abodes] and there attain final Nibbana, without ever
returning from that world/ let him fulfil the precepts. . , 81

14. "If a bhikkhu should wish: 82 'May I wield the various
kinds of supernormal power: having been one, may I become
many; having been many, may I become one; may I appear and
vanish; may I go unhindered through a wall, through an enclo-
sure, through a mountain ps though through space; may I dive
in and out of the earth as though it were water; may I walk on
water without sinking as though it were earth; seated cross-
legged, may I travel in space like a bird; with my hand may I
touch and stroke the moon and sun so powerful and mighty;
may I wield bodily mastery, even as far as the Brahma-world/
let him fulfil the precepts. . .

15. "If a bhikkhu should wish: 'May I, with the divine ear ele-
ment, which is purified and surpasses the human, hear both
kinds of sounds, the divine and the human, those that are far as
well as near,' let him fulfil the precepts. . .

16. "If a bhikkhu should wish: 'May I understand the minds of
other beings, of other persons, having encompassed them with
my own mind. May I understand a mind affected by lust as
affected by lust and a mind unaffected by lust as unaffected by


If a Bhikkhu Should Wish 11 7


i 36

lust; may I understand a mind affected by hate as affected by
hate and a mind unaffected by hate as unaffected by hate; may I
understand a mind affected by delusion as affected by delusion
and a mind unaffected by delusion as unaffected by delusion;
may I understand a contracted mind as contracted and a dis-
tracted mind as distracted; may I understand an exalted mind as
exalted and an unexalted mind as unexalted; may I understand
a surpassed mind as surpassed and an unsurpassed mind as
unsurpassed; may I understand a concentrated mind as concen-
trated [35] and an unconcentrated mind as unconcentrated; may
I understand a liberated mind as liberated and an unliberated
mind as unliberated/ let him fulfil the precepts...

17. "If a bhikkhu should wish: 'May I recollect my manifold
past lives, that is, one birth, two births... (as Sutta 4, §27). ..Thus
with their aspects and their particulars may I recollect my mani-
fold past lives,' let him fulfil the precepts. . .

18. "If a bhikkhu should wish: 'May I, with the divine eye,
which is purified and surpasses the human, see beings passing
away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and ugly, for-
tunate and unfortunate; may I understand how beings pass on
according to their actions thus:'... (as Sutta 4, §29)... let him fulfil
the precepts...

19. "If a bhikkhu should wish: 'May I, by realising for myself
with direct knowledge, here and now enter upon and abide in
the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are
taintless with the destruction of the taints/ 83 [36] let him fulfil
the precepts, be devoted to internal serenity of mind, not neglect
meditation, be possessed of insight, and dwell in empty huts.

20. "So it was with reference to this that it was said:
'Bhikkhus, dwell possessed of virtue, possessed of the Patimo-
kkha, restrained with the restraint of the Patimokkha, perfect in
conduct and resort, and seeing fear in the slightest fault, train by
undertaking the training precepts.'"

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


7 Vatthupama Sutta
The Simile of the Cloth


1. Thus have I heard . 84 On one occasion the Blessed One was
living at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There
he addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, suppose a cloth were defiled and stained, and a
dyer dipped it in some dye or other, whether blue or yellow or
red or pink; it would look poorly dyed and impure in colour.
Why is that? Because of the impurity of the cloth. So too, when
the mind is defiled, an unhappy destination may be expected. 85
Bhikkhus, suppose a cloth were pure and bright, and a dyer
dipped it in some dye or other, whether blue or yellow or red or
pink; it would look well-dyed and pure in colour. Why is that?
Because of the purity of the cloth. So too, when the mind is
undefiled, a happy destination may be expected.

3. "What, bhikkhus, are the imperfections that defile the
mind? 86 Covetousness and, unrighteous greed is an imperfection
that defiles the mind. 87 Ill will... anger... revenge... contempt... a
domineering attitude.. .envy. . .avarice. . .deceit. . .fraud. . .obstina-
cy .. .presumption. . .conceit. . . arrogance. . .vanity. . . [37] . . .negli-
gence is an imperfection that defiles the mind.

4. "Knowing that covetousness and unrighteous greed is an
imperfection that defiles the mind, a bhikkhu abandons it. 88
Knowing that ill will... negligence is an imperfection that defiles
the mind, a bhikkhu abandons it.

5. "When a bhikkhu has known that covetousness and
unrighteous greed is an imperfection that defiles the mind and
has abandoned it; when a bhikkhu has known that ill will. . .neg-
ligence is an imperfection that defiles the mind and has aban-
doned it, he acquires perfect confidence in the Buddha thus: 89
'The Blessed One is accomplished, fully enlightened, perfect in


118


i 38


The Simile of the Cloth 119


true knowledge and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds,
incomparable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and
humans, enlightened, blessed.'

6. "He acquires perfect confidence in the Dhamma thus: 'The
Dhamma is well proclaimed by the Blessed One, visible here
and now, immediately effective, inviting inspection, onward
leading, to be experienced by the wise for themselves.'

7. "He acquires perfect confidence in the Sangha thus: 'The
Sangha of the Blessed One's disciples is practising the good
way, practising the straight way, practising the true way, prac-
tising the proper way, that is, the four pairs of persons, the eight
types of individuals; this Sangha of the Blessed One's disciples
is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings,
worthy of reverential salutation, the unsurpassed field of merit
for the world.'

8. "When he has given up, expelled, released, abandoned, and
relinquished [the imperfections of the mind] in part, 90 he consid-
ers thus: 'I am possessed of perfect confidence in the Buddha,'
and he gains inspiration in the meaning, gains inspiration in the
Dhamma, 91 gains gladness connected with the Dhamma. When
he is glad, rapture is born in him; in one who is rapturous,
the body becomes tranquil; one whose body is tranquil feels
pleasure; in one who feels pleasure, the mind becomes con-
centrated. 92

9. "He considers thus: 'I am possessed of perfect confidence in
the Dhamma,' and he gains inspiration in the meaning, gains
inspiration in the Dhamma, gains gladness connected with the
Dhamma. When he is glad. . .the mind becomes concentrated. [38]

10. "He considers thus: 'I am possessed of perfect confidence
in the Sangha,' and he gains inspiration in the meaning, gains
inspiration in the Dhamma, gains gladness connected with the
Dhamma. When he is glad... the mind becomes concentrated.

11. "He considers thus: '[The imperfections of the mind] have
in part been given up, expelled, released, abandoned, and relin-
quished by me,' and he gains inspiration in the meaning, gains
inspiration in the Dhamma, gains gladness connected with the
Dhamma. When he is glad, rapture is born in him; in one who is
rapturous, the body becomes tranquil; one whose body is tran-
quil feels pleasure; in one who feels pleasure, the mmd becomes
concentrated.


120 Vatthupama Sutta: Sutta 7


i 39


12. "Bhikkhus, if a bhikkhu of such virtue, such a state [of con-
centration], and such wisdom 93 eats almsfood consisting of
choice hill rice along with various sauces and curries, even that
will be no obstacle for him. 94 Just as a cloth that is defiled and
stained becomes pure and bright with the help of clear water, or
just as gold becomes pure and bright with the help of a furnace,
so too, if a bhikkhu of such virtue... eats almsfood... that will be
no obstacle for him.

13. "He abides pervading one quarter with a mind imbued
with loving-kindness, 95 likewise the second, likewise the third,
likewise the fourth; so above, below, around, and everywhere,
and to all as to himself, he abides pervading the all-encompassing
world with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, abundant,
exalted, immeasurable, without hostility and without ill will.

14-16. "He abides pervading one quarter with a mind imbued
with compassion... with a mind imbued with appreciative
joy... with a mind imbued with equanimity, likewise the second,
likewise the third, likewise the fourth; so above, below, around,
and everywhere, and to all as to himself, he abides pervading
the all-encompassing world with a mind imbued with equanim-
ity, abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without hostility and
without ill will.

17. "He understands thus: 'There is this, there is the inferior,
there is the superior, and beyond there is an escape from this
whole field of perception.' 96

18. "When he knows and sees thus, his mind is liberated
from the taint of sensual desire, from the taint of being, and
from the taint of ignorance. When it is liberated there comes
the knowledge: 'It is liberated.' He understands: 'Birth is
destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done
has been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.'
[39] Bhikkhus, this bhikkhu is called one bathed with the
inner bathing." 97

19. Now on that occasion the brahmin Sundarika Bharadvaja
was sitting not far from the Blessed One. Then he said to the
Blessed One: "But does Master Gotama go to the Bahuka River
to bathe?"

"Why, brahmin, go to the Bahuka River? What can the Bahuka
River do?"


i 39


The Simile of the Cloth 121


"Master Gotama, the Bahuka River is held by many to give
liberation, it is held by many to give merit, and many wash
away their evil actions in the Bahuka River."

20. Then the Blessed One addressed the brahmin Sundarika
Bharadvaja in stanzas:

"Bahuka and Adhikakka,

Gaya and Sundarika too,

Payaga and Sarassatl,

And the stream Bahumatl - 98
A fool may there forever bathe
Yet will not purify dark deeds.

What can the Sundarika bring to pass?

What the Payaga? What the Bahuka?

They cannot purify an evil-doer,

A man who has done cruel and brutal deeds.

One pure in heart has evermore
The Feast of Spring, the Holy Day; 99
One fair in act, one pure in heart
Brings his virtue to perfection.

It is here, brahmin, that you should bathe.

To make yourself a refuge for all beings.

And if you speak no falsehood
Nor work harm for living beings.

Nor take what is offered not.

With faith and free from avarice.

What need for you to go to Gaya?

For any well will be your Gaya."

21. When this was said, the brahmin Sundarika Bharadvaja
said: "Magnificent, Master Gotama! Magnificent, Master
Gotama! Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many
ways, as though he were turning upright what had been over-
thrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one
who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with
eyesight to see forms. I go to Master Gotama for refuge and to


122 Vatthupama Sutta: Sutta 7


i 40


n

I the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus. I would receive the

going forth under Master Gotama, I would receive the full
admission." 100

22. And the brahmin Sundarika Bharadvaja received the going
forth under the Blessed One, and he received the full admission.

[40] And soon, not long after his full admission, dwelling alone,
withdrawn, diligent, ardent, and resolute, the venerable
Bharadvaja, by realising for himself with direct knowledge, here
and now entered upon and abided in that supreme goal of the
holy life for the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth from
the home life into homelessness. He directly knew: "Birth is
destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has
been done, there is no more coming to any state of being." And
the venerable Bharadvaja became one of the arahants.


J


8 Sallekha Sutta
Effacement


1. Thus have I heard. 101 On one occasion the Blessed One was
living at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.

2. Then, when it was evening, the venerable Maha Cunda
rose from meditation and went to the Blessed One. After pay-
ing homage to the Blessed One he sat down at one side and said
to him:

3. "Venerable sir, various views arise in the world associated
either with doctrines of a self or with doctrines about the
world. 102 Now does the abandoning and relinquishing of those
views come about in a bhikkhu who is attending only to the
beginning [of his meditative training]?" 103

"Cunda, as to those various views that arise in the world asso-
ciated either with doctrines of a self or with doctrines about the
world: if [the object] in relation to which those views arise,
which they underlie, and which they are exercised upon 104 is
seen as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: 'This is not mine,
this I am not, this is npt my self,' then the abandoning and relin-
quishing of those views comes about. 105

(the eight attainments)

4. "It is possible here, Cunda, that quite secluded from sensual
pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, some bhikkhu
enters upon and abides in the first jhana, which is accompanied
by applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure
born of seclusion. He might think thus: 'I am abiding in efface-
ment.' But it is not these attainments that are called 'effacement'
in the Noble One's Discipline: these are called 'pleasant abidings
here and now' [41] in the Noble One's Discipline. 106



123


124 Sallekha Sutta: Sutta 8


i 41


5. "It is possible here that with the stilling of applied and sus-
tained thought, some bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the
second jhana, which has self-confidence and singleness of mind
without applied and sustained thought, with rapture and plea-
sure born of concentration. He might think thus: 'I am abiding
in effacement.' But... these are called 'pleasant abidings here and
now' in the Noble One's Discipline.

6. "It is possible here that with the fading away as well of rap-
ture, some bhikkhu abides in equanimity, and mindful and fully
aware, still feeling pleasure with the body, he enters upon and
abides in the third jhana, on account of which noble ones
announce: 'He has a pleasant abiding who has equanimity and
is mindful.' He might think thus: 'I am abiding in effacement.'
But... these are called 'pleasant abidings here and now' in the
Noble One's Discipline.

7. "It is possible here that with the abandoning of pleasure
and pain, and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief,
some bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the fourth jhana, which
has neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to
equanimity. He might think thus: 'I am abiding in effacement.'
But it is not these attainments that are called 'effacement' in the
Noble One's Discipline, these are called 'pleasant abidings here
and now' in the Noble One's Discipline.

8. "It is possible here that with the complete surmounting of
perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of
sensory impact, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity,
aware that 'space is infinite/ some bhikkhu enters upon and
abides in the base of infinite space. He might think thus: 'I am
abiding in effacement.' But it is not these attainments that are
called 'effacement' in the Noble One's Discipline: these are
called 'peaceful abidings' in the Noble One's Discipline.

9. "It is possible here that by completely surmounting the base
of infinite space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite,' some
bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of infinite con-
sciousness. He might think thus: 'I am abiding in effacement.'
But... these are called 'peaceful abidings' in the Noble One's
Discipline.

10. "It is possible here that by completely surmounting the
base of infinite consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing,' some
bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of nothingness. He


Effacement 125



might think thus: 'I am abiding in effacement.' But... these are
called 'peaceful abidings' in the Noble One's Discipline.

11. "It is possible here that by completely surmounting the
base of nothingness, some bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the
base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception. He might think
thus: 'I am abiding in effacement.' [42] But these attainments are
not called 'effacement' in the Noble One's Discipline: these are
called 'peaceful abidings' in the Noble One's Discipline.

(effacement)

12. "Now, Cunda, here effacement should be practised by you: 107

(1) 'Others will be cruel; we shall not be cruel here': efface-
ment should be practised thus. 108

(2) 'Others will kill living beings; we shall abstain from killing
living beings here': effacement should be practised thus.

(3) 'Others will take what is not given; we shall abstain from tak-
ing what is not given here': effacement should be practised thus.

(4) 'Others will be uncelibate; we shall be celibate here': efface-
ment should be practised thus.

(5) 'Others will speak falsehood; we shall abstain from false
speech here': effacement should be practised thus.

(6) 'Others will speak maliciously; we shall abstain from mali-
cious speech here': effacement should be practised thus.

(7) 'Others will speak harshly; we shall abstain from harsh
speech here': effacement should be practised thus.

(8) 'Others will gossip; we shall abstain from gossip here':
effacement should be practised thus.

(9) 'Others will be covetous; we shall be uncovetous here':
effacement should be practised thus.

(10) 'Others will have ill will; we shall be without ill will here':
effacement should be practised thus.

(11) 'Others will be of wrong view; we shall be of right view
here': effacement should be practised thus.

(12) 'Others will be of wrong intention; we shall be of right
intention here': effacement should be practised thus.

(13) 'Others will be of wrong speech; we shall be of right
speech here': effacement should be practised thus.

(14) 'Others will be of wrong action; we shall be of right action

here': effacement should be practised thus. V



126 Sallekha Sutta: Sutta 8


i 43


(15) 'Others will be of wrong livelihood; we shall be of right
livelihood here': effacement should be practised thus.

(16) 'Others will be of wrong effort; we shall be of right effort
here': effacement should be practised thus.

(17) 'Others will be of wrong mindfulness; we shall be of right
mindfulness here': effacement should be practised thus.

(18) 'Others will be of wrong concentration; we shall be of
right concentration here': effacement should be practised thus.

(19) 'Others will be of wrong knowledge; we shall be of right
knowledge here': effacement should be practised thus.

(20) 'Others will be of wrong deliverance; we shall be of right
deliverance here': effacement should be practised thus.

(21) 'Others will be overcome by sloth and torpor; we shall
be free from sloth and torpor here': effacement should be
practised thus.

(22) 'Others will be restless; we shall not be restless here':
effacement should be practised thus.

(23) 'Others will be doubters; we shall go beyond doubt here':
effacement should be practised thus.

(24) 'Others will be angry; we shall not be angry here': efface-
ment should be practised thus.

(25) 'Others will be revengeful; we shall not be revengeful
here': effacement should be practised thus. [43]

(26) 'Others will be contemptuous; we shall not be contemp-
tuous here': effacement should be practised thus.

(27) 'Others will be domineering; we shall not be domineering
here': effacement should Be practised thus.

(28) 'Others will be envious; we shall not be envious here':
effacement should be practised thus.

(29) 'Others will be avaricious; we shall not be avaricious
here': effacement should be practised thus.

(30) 'Others will be fraudulent; we shall not be fraudulent
here': effacement should be practised thus.

(31) 'Others will be deceitful; we shall not be deceitful here':
effacement should be practised thus.

(32) 'Others will be obstinate; we shall not be obstinate here':
effacement should be practised thus.

(33) 'Others will be arrogant; we shall not be arrogant here':
effacement should be practised thus.

(34) 'Others will be difficult to admonish; we shall be easy to
admonish here': effacement should be practised thus.


i 43


Effacement 127


(35) 'Others will have bad friends; we shall have good friends
here': effacement should be practised thus.

(36) 'Others will be negligent; we shall be diligent here':
effacement should be practised thus.

(37) 'Others will be faithless; we shall be faithful here': efface-
ment should be practised thus.

(38) 'Others will be shameless; we shall be shameful here':
effacement should be practised thus.

(39) 'Others will have no fear of wrongdoing; we shall be
afraid of wrongdoing here': effacement should be practised thus.

(40) 'Others will be of little learning; we shall be of great learn-
ing here': effacement should be practised thus.

(41) 'Others will be lazy; we shall be energetic here': efface-
ment should be practised thus.

(42) 'Others will be unmindful; we shall be established in
mindfulness here': effacement should be practised thus.

(43) 'Others will lack wisdom; we shall possess wisdom here':
effacement should be practised thus.

(44) 'Others will adhere to their own views, hold on to them
tenaciously, and relinquish them with difficulty; 109 we shall
not adhere to our own views or hold on to them tenaciously,
but shall relinquish them easily': effacement should be prac-
tised thus.

(inclination of mind)

13. "Cunda, I say that even the inclination of mind towards
wholesome states is of great benefit, so what should be said of
bodily and verbal acts conforming [to such a state of mind]? 110
Therefore, Cunda:

(1) Mind should be inclined thus: 'Others will be cruel; we
shall not be cruel here.'

(2) Mind should be inclined thus: 'Others will kill living
beings; we shall abstain from killing living beings here.'

(3-43) Mind should be inclined thus:...

(44) Mind should be inclined thus: 'Others will adhere to their
own views, hold on to them tenaciously, and relinquish them
with difficulty; we shall not adhere to our own views or hold on
to them tenaciously, but shall relinquish thent easily.'


128 Sallekha Sutta: Sutta 8


144


(avoidance)

14. "Cunda, suppose there were an uneven path and another even
path by which to avoid it; and suppose there were an uneven ford
and another even ford by which to avoid it. [44] So too:

(1) A person given to cruelty has non-cruelty by which to
avoid it.

(2) One given to killing living beings has abstention from
killing living beings by which to avoid it.

(3) One given to taking what is not given has abstention from
taking what is not given by which to avoid it.

(4) One given to be uncelibate has celibacy by which to avoid it.

(5) One given to false speech has abstention from false speech
by which to avoid it.

(6) One given to malicious speech has abstention from mali-
cious speech by which to avoid it.

(7) One given to harsh speech has abstention from harsh
speech by which to avoid it.

(8) One given to gossip has abstention from gossip by which
to avoid it.

(9) One given to covetousness has uncovetousness by which to
avoid it.

(10) One given to ill will has non-ill will by which to avoid it.

(11) One given to wrong view has right view by which to
avoid it.

(12) One given to wrong intention has right intention by

which to avoid it. '

(13) One given to wrong speech has right speech by which to
avoid it.

(14) One given to wrong action has right action by which to
avoid it.

(15) One given to wrong livelihood has right livelihood by
which to avoid it.

(16) One given to wrong effort has right effort by which to
avoid it.

(17) One given to wrong mindfulness has right mindfulness
by which to avoid it.

(18) One given to wrong concentration has right concentration
by which to avoid it.



i 44


Effacement 129


(19) One given to wrong knowledge has right knowledge by
which to avoid it.

(20) One given to wrong deliverance has right deliverance by
which to avoid it.

(21) One given to sloth and torpor has freedom from sloth and
torpor by which to avoid it.

(22) One given to restlessness has non-restlessness by which to
avoid it.

(23) One given to doubt has the state beyond doubt by which
to avoid it.

(24) One given to anger has non-anger by which to avoid it.

(25) One given to revenge has non-revenge by which to avoid
it.

(26) One given to contempt has non-contempt by which to
avoid it.

(27) One given to a domineering attitude has a non-domineer-
ing attitude by which to avoid it.

(28) One given to envy has non-envy by which to avoid it.

(29) One given to avarice has non-avarice by which to avoid it.

(30) One given to fraud has non-fraud by which to avoid it.

(31) One given to deceit has non-deceit by which to avoid it.

(32) One given to obstinacy has non-obstinacy by which to
avoid it.

(33) One given to arrogance has non-arrogance by which to
avoid it.

(34) One given to being difficult to admonish has being easy to
admonish by which to avoid it.

(35) One given to making bad friends has making good
friends by which to avoid it.

(36) One given to negligence has diligence by which to avoid it.

(37) One given to faithlessness has faith by which to avoid it.

(38) One given to shamelessness has shame by which to avoid it.

(39) One given to fearlessness of wrongdoing has fear of
wrongdoing by which to avoid it.

(40) One given to little learning has great learning by which to
avoid it.

(41) One given to laziness has the arousal of energy by which
to avoid it.

(42) One given to unmindfulness ha^the' establishment of
mindfulness by which to avoid it.



130 Sallekha Sutta: Sutta 8


i 46


(43) One given to lack of wisdom has the acquisition of wis-
dom by which to avoid it.

(44) One given to adhere to his own views, who holds on to
them tenaciously and relinquishes them with difficulty, has non-
adherence to his own views, not holding on to them tenaciously
and relinquishing them easily, by which to avoid it.

(the way leading upwards)

15. "Cunda, just as all unwholesome states lead downwards and
all wholesome states lead upwards, so too:

(1) A person given to cruelty has non-cruelty to lead him
upwards.

(2) One given to killing living beings has abstention from
killing living beings to lead him upwards.

(3~ 43) One given to. . .to lead him upwards.

(44) One given to adhere to his own views, who holds on to
them tenaciously [45] and relinquishes them with difficulty, has
non-adherence to his own views, not holding on to them tena-
ciously and relinquishing them easily, to lead him upwards.

(the way of extinguishing)

16. "Cunda, that one who is himself sinking in the mud should
pull out another who is sinking in the mud is impossible; that
one who is not himself sinking in the mud should pull out
another who is sinking in the mud is possible. That one who is
himself untamed, undisciplined, [with defilements] unextin-
guished, should tame another, discipline him, and help extin-
guish [his defilements] is impossible; that one who is himself
tamed, disciplined, [with defilements] extinguished, should
tame another, discipline him, and help extinguish [his defile-
ments] is possible. 111 So too:

(1) A person given to cruelty has non-cruelty by which to
extinguish it. 112

(2) One given to killing living beings has abstention from
killing living beings by which to extinguish it.

(3~ 43) One given to . . . [46] . . .by which to extinguish it.

(44) One given to adhere to his own views, who holds on to
them tenaciously and relinquishes them with difficulty, has


i 46


Effacement 131


non-adherence to his own views, not holding on to them tena-
ciously and relinquishing them easily, by which to extinguish it.

(conclusion)

17. "So, Cunda, the way of effacement has been taught by me,
the way of inclining the mind has been taught by me, the way of
avoidance has been taught by me, the way leading upwards has
been taught by me, and the way of extinguishing has been
taught by me.

18. "What should be done for his disciples out of compassion
by a teacher who seeks their welfare and has compassion for
them, that I have done for you, Cunda. 113 There are these roots
of trees, these empty huts. Meditate, Cunda, do not delay or else
you will regret it later. This is our instruction to you."

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Maha Cunda
was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


9 Sammaditthi Sutta
Right View


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There the
venerable Sariputta addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Friends,
bhikkhus." - "Friend," they replied. The venerable Sariputta
said this:

2. "'One of right view, one of right view/ is said, friends. In
what way is a noble disciple one of right view, whose view is
straight, who has perfect confidence in the Dhamma, and has
arrived at this true Dhamma?" 114

"Indeed, friend, we would come from far away to learn from
the venerable Sariputta the meaning of this statement. It would
be good if the venerable Sariputta would explain the meaning of
this statement. Having heard it from him, the bhikkhus will
remember it."

"Then, friends, listen and attend closely to what I shall say."

"Yes, friend," the bhikkhus replied. The venerable Sariputta
said this:


(the wholesome and the unwholesome)

3. "When, friends, a noble disciple understands the unwhole-
some and the root of the unwholesome, the wholesome and the
root of the wholesome, [47] in that way he is one of right view,
whose view is straight, who has perfect confidence in the
Dhamma and has arrived at this tine Dhamma.

4. "And what, friends, is the unwholesome, what is the root of
the unwholesome, what is the wholesome, what is the root of
the wholesome? Killing living beings is unwholesome; taking
what is not given is unwholesome; misconduct in sensual plea-
sures is unwholesome; false speech is unwholesome; malicious


132


47


Right View 133


speech is unwholesome; harsh speech is unwholesome; gossip is
unwholesome; covetousness is unwholesome; ill will is
unwholesome; wrong view is unwholesome. This is called the
unwholesome. 115

5. "And what is the root of the unwholesome? Greed is a root
of the unwholesome; hate is a root of the unwholesome; delu-
sion is a root of the unwholesome. This is called the root of the
unwholesome. 116

6. "And what is the wholesome? Abstention from killing living
beings is wholesome; abstention from taking what is not given is
wholesome; abstention from misconduct in sensual pleasures is
wholesome; abstention from false speech is wholesome; absten-
tion from malicious speech is wholesome; abstention from harsh
speech is wholesome; abstention from gossip is wholesome;
uncovetousness is wholesome; non-ill will is wholesome; right
view is wholesome. This is called the wholesome. 117

7. "And what is the root of the wholesome? Non-greed is a
root of the wholesome; non-hate is a root of the wholesome;
non-delusion is a root of the wholesome. This is called the root
of the wholesome.

8. "When a noble disciple has thus understood the unwhole-
some and the root of the unwholesome, the wholesome and the
root of the wholesome, 118 he entirely abandons the underlying
tendency to lust, he abolishes the underlying tendency to aver-
sion, he extirpates the underlying tendency to the view and con-
ceit 'I am/ and by abandoning ignorance and arousing true
knowledge he here and now makes an end of suffering. 119 In
that way too a noble disciple is one of right view, whose view is
straight, who has perfect confidence in the Dhamma, and has
arrived at this true Dhamma."

(nutriment)

9. Saying, "Good, friend," the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced
in the venerable Sariputta's words. Then they asked him a fur-
ther question: "But, friend, might there be another way in which
a noble disciple is one of right view. . .and has arrived at this true
Dhamma?" - "There might be, friends. '

10. "When, friends, a noble disciple understandsmutriment,
the origin of nutriment, the cessation of nutriment, and the way


134 Sammaditthi Sutta: Sutta 9


i 48


leading to the cessation of nutriment, in that way he is one of
right view. . .and has arrived [48] at this true Dhamma.

11. "And what is nutriment, what is the origin of nutriment,
what is the cessation of nutriment, what is the way leading to
the cessation of nutriment? There are four kinds of nutriment for
the maintenance of beings that already have come to be and for
the support of those seeking a new existence. What four? They
are: physical food as nutriment, gross or subtle; contact as the
second; mental volition as the third; and consciousness as the
fourth. 120 With the arising of craving there is the arising of nutri-
ment. With the cessation of craving there is the cessation of
nutriment. The way leading to the cessation of nutriment is just
this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view, right intention,
right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, and right concentration.

12. "When a noble disciple has thus understood nutriment, the
origin of nutriment, the cessation of nutriment, and the way
leading to the cessation of nutriment, he entirely abandons the
underlying tendency to greed, he abolishes the underlying ten-
dency to aversion, he extirpates the underlying tendency to the
view and conceit T am/ and by abandoning ignorance and
arousing true knowledge he here and now makes an end of suf-
fering. In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view,
whose view is straight, who has perfect confidence in the
Dhamma, and has arrived at this true Dhamma."

(the four noble truths)

13. Saying, "Good, friend," the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced
in the venerable Sariputta's words. Then they asked him a fur-
ther question: "But, friend, might there be another way in which
a noble disciple is one of right view... and has arrived at this true
Dhamma?" - "There might be, friends.

14. "When, friends, a noble disciple understands suffering, the
origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the way lead-
ing to the cessation of suffering, in that way he is one of right
view... and has arrived at this true Dhamma.

15. "And what is suffering, what is the origin of suffering,
what is the cessation of suffering, what is the way leading to the
cessation of suffering? Birth is suffering; ageing is suffering;


i 49


Right View 135


sickness is suffering; death is suffering; sorrow, lamentation,
pain, grief, and despair are suffering; not to obtain what one
wants is suffering; in short, the five aggregates affected by cling-
ing are suffering. This is called suffering.

16. "And what is the origin of suffering? It is craving, which
brings renewal of being, is accompanied by delight and lust, and
delights in this and that; that is, craving for sensual pleasures
[49], craving for being, and craving for non-being. This is called
the origin of suffering.

17. "And what is the cessation of suffering? It is the remain-
derless fading away and ceasing, the giving up, relinquishing,
letting go, and rejecting of that same craving. This is called the
cessation of suffering.

18. "And what is the way leading to the cessation of suffering? It
is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view... right concen-
tration. This is called the way leading to the cessation of suffering.

19. "When a noble disciple has thus understood suffering, the
origin of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the way lead-
ing to the cessation of suffering. . .he here and now makes an end
of suffering. In that way too a noble disciple is one of right
view... and has arrived at this true Dhamma."

(ageing and death)

20. Saying, "Good, friend," the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced
in the venerable Sariputta's words. Then they asked him a fur-
ther question: "But, friend, might there be another way in which
a noble disciple is one of right view... and has arrived at this true
Dhamma?" - "There might be, friends.

21. "When, friends, a noble disciple understands ageing and
death, the origin of ageing and death, the cessation of ageing
and death, and the way leading to the cessation of ageing and
death, in that way he is one of right view... and has arrived at
this true Dhamma. 121

22. "And what is ageing and death, what is the origin of ageing
and death, what is the cessation of ageing and death, what is the
way leading to the cessation of ageing and death? The ageing of
beings in the various orders of /beings, their old age, brokenness
of teeth, greyness of hair, wrinkling of skin, decline of life, weak-
ness of faculties - this is called ageing. The passing of beings out


136 Sammaditthi Sutta: Sutta 9


i 50


of the various orders of beings, their passing away, dissolution,
disappearance, dying, completion of time, dissolution of the
aggregates, 122 laying down of the body - this is called death. So
this ageing and this death are what is called ageing and death.
With the arising of birth there is the arising of ageing and death.
With the cessation of birth there is the cessation of ageing and
death. The way leading to the cessation of ageing and death is just
this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view. . .right concentration.

23. "When a noble disciple has thus understood ageing and
death, the origin of ageing and death, the cessation of ageing
and death, and the way leading to the cessation of ageing and
death... he here and now makes an end of suffering. In that way
too a noble disciple is one of right view... and has arrived at this
true Dhamma."

(birth)

24. Saying, "Good, friend," the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced
in the venerable Sariputta's words. Then they asked him a fur-
ther question; "But, friend, might there be another way in which
a noble disciple is one of right view... and has arrived at this true
Dhamma?" - [50] "There might be, friends.

25. "When, friends, a noble disciple understands birth, the ori-
gin of birth, the cessation of birth, and the way leading to the
cessation of birth, in that way he is one of right view... and has
arrived at this true Dhamma.

26. "And what is birth. What is the origin of birth, what is the
cessation of birth, what is the way leading to the cessation of
birth? The birth of beings in the various orders of beings, their
coming to birth, precipitation [in a womb], generation, manifes-
tation of the aggregates, obtaining the bases for contact 123 - this
is called birth. With the arising of being there is the arising of
birth. With the cessation of being there is the cessation of birth.
The way leading to the cessation of birth is just this Noble
Eightfold Path; that is, right view. . .right concentration.

27. "When a noble disciple has thus understood birth, the ori-
gin of birth, the cessation of birth, and the way leading to the
cessation of birth... he here and now makes an end of suffering.
In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view... and has
arrived at this true Dhamma."


i 51


Right View 137


(being)

28. Saying, “Good, friend," the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced
in the venerable Sariputta's words. Then they asked him a fur-
ther question: "But, friend, might there be another way in which
a noble disciple is one of right view. . .and has arrived at this true
Dhamma?" - "There might be, friends.

29. "When, friends, a noble disciple understands being, the
origin of being, the cessation of being, and the way leading to
the cessation of being, in that way he is one of right view... and
has arrived at this true Dhamma.

30. "And what is being, what is the origin of being, what is the
cessation of being, what is the way leading to the cessation of
being? There are these three kinds of being: sense-sphere being,
fine-material being, and immaterial being. 124 With the arising of
clinging there is the arising of being. With the cessation of cling-
ing there is the cessation of being. The way leading to the cessa-
tion of being is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right
view. . .right concentration.

31. "When a noble disciple has thus understood being, the ori-
gin of being, the cessation of being, and the way leading to the
cessation of being. . .he here and now makes an end of suffering.
In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view... and has
arrived at this true Dhamma."

(clinging)

32. Saying, "Good, friend," the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced
in the venerable Sariputta's words. Then they asked him a fur-
ther question: "But, friend, might there be another way in which
a noble disciple is one of right view. . .and has arrived at this true
Dhamma?" - "There might be, friends.

33. "When, friends, a noble disciple understands clinging, the
origin of clinging, the cessation of clinging, and the way leading
to the cessation of clinging, in that way he is one of right view...
and has arrived at this true Dhamma.

34. "And what is clinging, what is the origin of clinging, what
is the cessation of clinging, what is the way leading to the cessa-
tion of clinging? There are these four [51] kinds of clinging:
clinging to sensual pleasures, clinging to views, clinging to rules


138 Sammaditthi Sutta: Sutta 9


i 51


and observances, and clinging to a doctrine of self. 125 With the
arising of craving there is the arising of clinging. With the cessa-
tion of craving there is the cessation of clinging. The way lead-
ing to the cessation of clinging is just this Noble Eightfold Path;
that is, right view. . .right concentration.

35. "When a noble disciple has thus understood clinging, the
origin of clinging, the cessation of clinging, and the way leading
to the cessation of clinging... he here and now makes an end of
suffering. In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view...
and has arrived at this true Dhamma."

(craving)

36. Saying, "Good, friend," the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced
in the venerable Sariputta's words. Then they asked him a fur-
ther question: "But, friend, might there be another way in which
a noble disciple is one of right view. . .and has arrived at this true
Dhamma?" - "There might be, friends.

37. "When, friends, a noble disciple understands craving, the
origin of craving, the cessation of craving, and the way leading
to the cessation of craving, in that way he is one of right view. . .
and has arrived at this true Dhamma.

38. "And what is craving, what is the origin of craving, what is
the cessation of craving, what is the way leading to the cessation
of craving? There are these six classes of craving: craving for
forms, craving for sounds, craving for odours, craving for
flavours, craving for tangibles, craving for mind-objects. 126 With
the arising of feeling there is the arising of craving. With the ces-
sation of feeling there is the cessation of craving. The way lead-
ing to the cessation of craving is just this Noble Eightfold Path;
that is, right view. . .right concentration.

39. "When a noble disciple has thus understood craving, the
origin of craving, the cessation of craving, and the way leading
to the cessation of craving... he here and now makes an end of
suffering. In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view. . .
and has arrived at this true Dhamma."


I

; j


i 52


Right View 139


(feeling)

40. Saying, "Good, friend," the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced
in the venerable Sariputta's words. Then they asked him a fur-
ther question: "But, friend, might there be another way in which
a noble disciple is one of right view. . .and has arrived at this true
Dhamma?" - "There might be, friends.

41. "When, friends, a noble disciple understands feeling, the
origin of feeling, the cessation of feeling, and the way leading to
the cessation of feeling, in that way he is one of right view. . .and
has arrived at this true Dhamma.

42. "And what is feeling, what is the origin of feeling, what is
the cessation of feeling, what is the way leading to the cessation
of feeling? There are these six classes of feeling: feeling born of
eye-contact, feeling born of ear-contact, feeling born of nose-
contact, feeling born of tongue-contact, feeling born of body-
contact, feeling born of mind-contact. With the arising of contact
there is the arising of feeling. With the cessation of contact there
is the cessation of feeling. The way leading to the cessation of
feeling is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view...
right concentration. [52]

43. "When a noble disciple has thus understood feeling, the
origin of feeling, the cessation of feeling, and the way leading to
the cessation of feeling... he here and now makes an end of suf-
fering. In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view. . .and
has arrived at this true Dhamma."

(contact)

44. Saying, "Good, friend," the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced
in the venerable Sariputta's words. Then they asked him a fur-
ther question: "But, friend, might there be another way in which
a noble disciple is one of right view. . .and has arrived at this true
Dhamma?" - "There might be, friends.

45. "When, friends, a noble disciple understands contact, the
origin of contact, the cessation of contact, and the way leading to
the cessation of contact, in that way he is one of right view. . .and
has arrived at this true Dhamma.

46. "And what is contact, what is the origin of contact, what is
the cessation of contact, what is the way leading to the-eesSation


140 Sammaditthi Sutta: Sutta 9


i 53


of contact? There are these six classes of contact: eye-contact,
ear-contact, nose-contact, tongue-contact, body-contact, mind-
contact. 127 With the arising of the sixfold base there is the arising
of contact. With the cessation of the sixfold base there is the ces-
sation of contact. The way leading to the cessation of contact is
just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view... right concen-
tration.

47. "When a noble disciple has thus understood contact, the
origin of contact, the cessation of contact, and the way leading to
the cessation of contact... he here and now makes an end of suf-
fering. In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view. . .and
has arrived at this true Dhamma."

(the sixfold base)

48. Saying, "Good, friend," the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced
in the venerable Sariputta's words. Then they asked him a fur-
ther question: "But, friend, might there be another way in which
a noble disciple is one of right view. . .and has arrived at this true
Dhamma?" - "There might be, friends.

49. "When, friends, a noble disciple understands the sixfold
base, the origin of the sixfold base, the cessation of the sixfold base,
and the way leading to the cessation of the sixfold base, in that
way he is one of right view. . .and has arrived at this true Dhamma.

50. "And what is the sixfold base, what is the origin of the
sixfold base, what is the .cessation of the sixfold base, what is
the way leading to the cessation of the sixfold base? There are
these six bases: the eye-base, the ear-base, the nose-base, the
tongue-base, the body-base, the mind-base. 128 With the arising
of mentality-materiality there is the arising of the sixfold base.
With the cessation of mentality-materiality there is the cessa-
tion of the sixfold base. The way leading to the cessation of the
sixfold base is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right
view. . .right concentration.

51. "When a noble disciple has thus understood the sixfold
base, the origin of the sixfold base, the cessation of the sixfold
base, and [53] the way leading to the cessation of the sixfold
base... he here and now makes an end of suffering. In that way
too a noble disciple is one of right view... and has arrived at this
true Dhamma."


i 53


Right View 141


(mentality-materiality)

52. Saying, "Good, friend," the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced
in the venerable Sariputta's words. Then they asked him a fur-
ther question: "But, friend, might there be another way in which
a noble disciple is one of right view. . .and has arrived at this true
Dhamma?" - "There might be, friends.

53. "When, friends, a noble disciple understands mentality-
materiality, the origin of mentality-materiality, the cessation of
mentality-materiality, and the way leading to the cessation of
mentality-materiality, in that way he is one of right view... and
has arrived at this true Dhamma. 129

54. "And what is mentality-materiality, what is the origin of
mentality-materiality, what is the cessation of mentality-
materiality, what is the way leading to the cessation of mentality-
materiality? Feeling, perception, volition, contact, and attention
- these are called mentality. The four great elements and the
material form derived from the four great elements - these are
called materiality. So this mentality and this materiality are
what is called mentality-materiality. With the arising of conscious-
ness there is the arising of mentality-materiality. With the cessa-
tion of consciousness there is the cessation of mentality-materiali-
ty. The way leading to the cessation of mentality-materiality is just
this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view. . .right concentration.

55. "When a noble disciple has thus understood mentality-
materiality, the origin of mentality-materiality, the cessation of
mentality-materiality, and the way leading to the cessation of
mentality-materiality... he here and now makes an end of suffer-
ing. In that way too a noble disciple is one of right view... and
has arrived at this true Dhamma."

(consciousness)

56. Saying, "Good, friend," the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced
in the venerable Sariputta's words. Then they asked him a fur-
ther question: "But, friend, might there be another way in which
a noble disciple is one of right view. . .and has arrived at this true
Dhamma?" - "There might be, friends.

57. "When, friends, a noble disciple understands consciousness,
the origin of consciousness, the cessation of consciousness, and


i


142 Sammaditthi Sutta: Sutta 9

the way leading to the cessation of consciousness, in that way he
is one of right view. . .and has arrived at this true Dhamma.

58. "And what is consciousness, what is the origin of con-
sciousness, what is the cessation of consciousness, what is the
way leading to the cessation of consciousness? There are these six
classes of consciousness: eye-consciousness, ear-consciousness,
nose-consciousness, tongue-consciousness, body-consciousness,
mind-consciousness. 130 With the arising of formations there is
the arising of consciousness. With the cessation of formations
there is the cessation of consciousness. The way leading to the
cessation of consciousness is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that
is, right view. . .right concentration.

59. "When a noble disciple has thus understood consciousness,
the origin of consciousness, the cessation of consciousness, and
the way leading to the cessation of consciousness [54]... he here
and now makes an end of suffering. In that way too a noble disci-
ple is one of right view. . .and has arrived at this true Dhamma."

(formations)

60. Saying, "Good, friend," the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced
in the venerable Sariputta's words. Then they asked him a fur-
ther question: "But, friend, might there be another way in which
a noble disciple is one of right view. . .and has arrived at this true
Dhamma?" - "There might be, friends.

61. "When, friends, a noble disciple understands formations,
the origin of formations, the cessation of formations, and the
way leading to the cessation of formations, in that way he is one
of right view. . .and has arrived at this true Dhamma.

62. "And what are formations, what is the origin of formations,
what is the cessation of formations, what is the way leading to the
cessation of formations? There are these three kinds of formations:
the bodily formation, the verbal formation, the mental forma-
tion. 131 With the arising of ignorance there is the arising of for-
mations. With the cessation of ignorance there is the cessation of
formations. The way leading to the cessation of formations is just
this Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view. . .right concentration.

63. "When a noble disciple has thus understood formations,
the origin of formations, the cessation of formations, and the
way leading to the cessation of formations... he here and now



i 54


i 55


Right View 143


makes an end of suffering. In that way too a noble disciple is
one of right view. . .and has arrived at this true Dhamma."

(ignorance)

64. Saying, "Good, friend," the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced
in the venerable Sariputta's words. Then they asked him a fur-
ther question: "But, friend, might there be another way in which
a noble disciple is one of right view. . .and has arrived at this true
Dhamma?" - "There might be, friends.

65. "When, friends, a noble disciple understands ignorance,
the origin of ignorance, the cessation of ignorance, and the way
leading to the cessation of ignorance, in that way he is one of
right view... and has arrived at this true Dhamma.

66. "And what is ignorance, what is the origin of ignorance,
what is the cessation of ignorance, what is the way leading to
the cessation of ignorance? Not knowing about suffering, not
knowing about the origin of suffering, not knowing about the
cessation of suffering, not knowing about the way leading to the
cessation of suffering - this is called ignorance. With the arising
of the taints there is the arising of ignorance. With the cessation
of the taints there is the cessation of ignorance. The way leading
to the cessation of ignorance is just this Noble Eightfold Path;
that is, right view. . .right concentration.

67. "When a noble disciple has thus understood ignorance, the
origin of ignorance, the cessation of ignorance, and the way
leading to the cessation of ignorance... he here and now makes
an end of suffering. In that way too a noble disciple is one of
right view... and has arrived at this true Dhamma."

(taints)

68. Saying, "Good, friend," the bhikkhus delighted and rejoiced
in the venerable Sariputta's words. Then they asked him a fur-
ther question: "But, friend, might there be another [55] way in
which a noble disciple is one of right view, whose view is
straight, who has perfect confidence in the Dhamma, and has
arrived at this true Dhamma?" - "There might be, friends.

69. "When, friends, a noble disciple understands the taints,
the origin of the taints, the cessation of the taints, and the way


144 Sammaditthi Sutta: Sutta 9


i 55


leading to the cessation of the taints, in that way he is one of
right view, whose view is straight, who has perfect confidence
in the Dhamma, and has arrived at this true Dhamma.

70. "And what are the taints, what is the origin of the taints,
what is the cessation of the taints, what is the way leading to the
cessation of the taints? There are these three taints: the taint of
sensual desire, the taint of being, and the taint of ignorance.
With the arising of ignorance there is the arising of the taints. 132
With the cessation of ignorance there is the cessation of the
taints. The way leading to the cessation of the taints is just this
Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view, right intention, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindful-
ness, and right concentration.

71. "When a noble disciple has thus understood the taints, the
origin of the taints, the cessation of the taints, and the way lead-
ing to the cessation of the taints, he entirely abandons the under-
lying tendency to lust, he abolishes the underlying tendency to
aversion, he extirpates the underlying tendency to the view and
conceit 1 am/ and by abandoning ignorance and arousing true
knowledge he here and now makes an end of suffering. In that
way too a noble disciple is one of right view, whose view is
straight, who has perfect confidence in the Dhamma, and has
arrived at this true Dhamma."

That is what the venerable Sariputta said. The bhikkhus were
satisfied and delighted in the venerable Sariputta 's words.


10 Satipatthana Sutta
The Foundations of Mindfulness


1. Thus have I heard . 133 On one occasion the Blessed One was
living in the Kuru country at a town of the Kurus named Kamma-
sadhamma. 134 There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhik-
khus." - "Venerable sir," they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, this is the direct path 135 for the purification of
beings [56], for the surmounting of sorrow and lamentation, for
the disappearance of pain and grief, for the attainment of the
true way, for the realisation of Nibbana - namely, the four foun-
dations of mindfulness. 136

3. "What are the four? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu 137 abides
contemplating the body as a body, ardent, fully aware, and
mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the
world. 138 He abides contemplating feelings as feelings, ardent,
fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and
grief for the world. He abides contemplating mind as mind,
ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness
and grief for the world. He abides contemplating mind-objects
as mind-objects, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put
away covetousness and grief for the world. 139

(contemplation of the body)

(2. Mindfulness of Breathing)

4. "And how, bhikkhus, does a bhikkhu abide contemplating the
body as a body? Here a bhikkhu, gone to the forest or to the root
of a tree or to an empty hut, sits down; having folded his legs
crosswise, set his body erect, and established mindfulness in
front of him, ever mindful he breathes in, mindful he breathes
out. Breathing in long, he understand^/! breathe in long'; or


146 Satipatthana Sutta: Sutta 10


157


breathing out long, he understands: 'I breathe out long.'
Breathing in short, he understands: 'I breathe in short'; or
breathing out short, he understands: 'I breathe out short.' 140 He
trains thus: 'I shall breathe in experiencing the whole body [of
breath]'; he trains thus: 'I shall breathe out experiencing the
whole body [of breath].' 141 He trains thus: 'I shall breathe in
tranquillizing the bodily formation'; he trains thus: 'I shall
breathe out tranquillizing the bodily formation.' 142 Just as a
skilled turner or his apprentice, when making a long turn,
understands: 'I make a long turn'; or, when making a short turn,
understands: 'I make a short turn'; so too, breathing in long, a
bhikkhu understands: 1 breathe in long'... he trains thus: 'I shall
breathe out tranquillizing the bodily formation.'

(insight)

5. "In this way he abides contemplating the body as a body
internally, or he abides contemplating the body as a body exter-
nally, or he abides contemplating the body as a body both inter-
naljy-and externally. 143 Or else he abides contemplating in the
body its arising factors, or he abides contemplating in the body
its vanishing factors, or he abides contemplating in the body
both its arising and vanishing factors. 144 Or else mindfulness
that 'there is a body' is simply established in him to the extent
necessary for bare knowledge and mindfulness. 145 And he
abides independent, not clinging to anything in the world. That
is how a bhikkhu abides contemplating the body as a body.

(2. The Four Postures)

6. "Again, bhikkhus, when walking, a bhikkhu understands: 'I
am walking'; when standing, he understands: 'I am standing';
when sitting, [57] he understands: 'I am sitting'; when lying
down, he understands: 'I am lying down'; or he understands
accordingly however his body is disposed. 146

7. "In this way he abides contemplating the body as a body
internally, externally, and both internally and externally... And he
abides independent, not clinging to anything in the world. That
too is how a bhikkhu abides contemplating the body as a body.


The Foundations of Mindfulness 147


(3. Full Awareness)

8. "Again, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu is one who acts in full awareness
when going forward and returning; 147 who acts in full aware-
ness when looking ahead and looking away; who acts in full
awareness when flexing and extending his limbs; who acts in
full awareness when wearing his robes and carrying his outer
robe and bowl; who acts in full awareness when eating, drink-
ing, consuming food, and tasting; who acts in full awareness
when defecating and urinating; who acts in full awareness when
walking, standing, sitting, falling asleep, waking up, talking,
and keeping silent.

9. "In this way he abides contemplating the body as a body
internally, externally, and both internally and externally. . .And he
abides independent, not clinging to anything in the world. That
too is how a bhikkhu abides contemplating the body as a body.


(4. Foulness - The Bodily Parts)

10. "Again, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu reviews this same body up
from the soles of the feet and down from the top of the hair,
bounded by skin, as full of many kinds of impurity thus: 'In
this body there are head-hairs, body-hairs, nails, teeth, skin,
flesh, sinews, bones, bone-marrow, kidneys, heart, liver,
diaphragm, spleen, lungs, large intestines, small intestines,
contents of the stomach, feces, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat,
fat, tears, grease, spittle, snot, oil of the joints, and urine.' 148
Just as though there were a bag with an opening at both ends
full of many sorts of grain, such as hill rice, red rice, beans,
peas, millet, and white rice, and a man with good eyes were to
open it and review it thus: 'This is hill rice, this is red rice,
these are beans, these are peas, this is millet, this is white rice';
so too, a bhikkhu reviews this same body... as full of many
kinds of impurity thus: 'In this body there are head-hairs... and
urine.'

11. "In this way he abides contemplating the body as a body
internally, externally, and both internally and externally. . .And he
abides independent, not clinging to anything in the world. That
too is how a bhikkhu abides contemplating the body as a body.


148 Satipatthana Sutta: Sutta 10


i 58


I


l


f




Is


(5. Elements)


12. "Again, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu reviews this same body, how-
ever it is placed, however disposed, as consisting of elements
thus: 'In this body there are the earth element, the water ele-
ment, the fire element, and the air element.' 149 [58] Just as
though a skilled butcher or his apprentice had killed a cow and
was seated at the crossroads with it cut up into pieces; so too, a
bhikkhu reviews this same body... as consisting of elements
thus: 'In this body there are the earth element, the water ele-
ment, the fire element, and the air element.'

13. "In this way he abides contemplating the body as a body
internally, externally, and both internally and externally. . .And he
abides independent, not clinging to anything in the world. That
too is how a bhikkhu abides contemplating the body as a body.


(6-14. The Nine Charnel Ground Contemplations)

14. "Again, bhikkhus, as though he were to see a corpse thrown
aside in a charnel ground, one, two, or three days dead, bloated,
livid, and oozing matter, a bhikkhu compares this same body
with it thus: 'This body too is of the same nature, it will be like
that, it is not exempt from that fate.' 150

15. "In this way he abides contemplating the body as a body
internally, externally, and both internally and externally. . .And he
abides independent, not (Tinging to anything in the world. That
too is how a bhikkhu abides contemplating the body as a body.

16. "Again, as though he were to see a corpse thrown aside in
a charnel ground, being devoured by crows, hawks, vultures,
dogs, jackals, or various kinds of worms, a bhikkhu compares
this same body with it thus: 'This body too is of the same nature,
it will be like that, it is not exempt from that fate.'

17. "...That too is how a bhikkhu abides contemplating the
body as a body.

18-24. "Again, as though he were to see a corpse thrown aside
in a charnel ground, a skeleton with flesh and blood, held
together with sinews... a fleshless skeleton smeared with blood,
held together with sinews... a skeleton without flesh and blood,
held together with sinews... disconnected bones scattered in all
directions - here a hand-bone, there a foot-bone, here a shin-bone.


i 59


The Foundations of Mindfulness 149


there a thigh-bone, here a hip-bone, there a back-bone, here a
rib-bone, there a breast-bone, here an arm-bone, there a shoul-
der-bone, here a neck-bone, there a jaw-bone, here a tooth, there
the skull - a bhikkhu compares this same body with it thus:
'This body too is of the same nature, it will be like that, it is not
exempt from that fate.' 151

25. "...That too is how a bhikkhu abides contemplating the
body as a body.

26-30. "Again, as though he were to see a corpse thrown aside
in a charnel ground, bones bleached white, the colour of shells...
bones heaped up, more than a year old. . .bones rotted and crum-
bled to dust [59], a bhikkhu compares this same body with it
thus: 'This body too is of the same nature, it will be like that, it is
not exempt from that fate.'

(insight)

31. "In this way he abides contemplating the body as a body
internally, or he abides contemplating the body as a body exter-
nally, or he abides contemplating the body as a body both inter-
nally and externally. Or else he abides contemplating in the
body its arising factors, or he abides contemplating in the body
its vanishing factors, or he abides contemplating in the body
both its arising and vanishing factors. Or else mindfulness that
'there is a body' is simply established in him to the extent neces-
sary for bare knowledge and mindfulness. And he abides inde-
pendent, not clinging to anything in the world. That too is how
a bhikkhu abides contemplating the body as a body.

(contemplation of feeling)

32. "And how, bhikkhus, does a bhikkhu abide contemplating
feelings as feelings? 152 Here, when feeling a pleasant feeling, a
bhikkhu understands: 'I feel a pleasant feeling'; when feeling a
painful feeling, he understands: 'I feel a painful feeling'; when
feeling a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, he understands:
T feel a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling.' When feeling a
worldly pleasant feeling, he understands: 'I feel a worldly
pleasant feeling'; when feeling an unworldly pleasant feeling, he
understands: 'I feel an unworldly pleasant feeling'; when feeling


150 Satipatthana Sutta: Sutta 10


i 59


a worldly painful feeling, he understands: 'I feel a worldly
painful feeling'; when feeling an unworldly painful feeling, he
understands: 'I feel an unworldly painful feeling'; when feeling
a worldly neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, he understands:
'I feel a worldly neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling'; when
feeling an unworldly neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, he
understands: 'I feel an unworldly neither-painful-nor-pleasant
feeling.'

(insight)

33. "In this way he abides contemplating feelings as feelings inter-
nally, or he abides contemplating feelings as feelings externally,
or he abides contemplating feelings as feelings both internally
and externally. Or else he abides contemplating in feelings their
arising factors, or he abides contemplating in feelings their van-
ishing factors, or he abides contemplating in feelings both their
arising and vanishing factors. 153 Or else mindfulness that 'there is
feeling' is simply established in him to the extent necessary for bare
knowledge and mindfulness. And he abides independent, not
clinging to anything in the world. That is how a bhikkhu abides
contemplating feelings as feelings.

(contemplation of mind)

34. "And how, bhikkhus, does a bhikkhu abide contemplating
mind as mind? 154 Here a bhikkhu understands mind affected
by lust as mind affected by lust, and mind unaffected by lust as
mind unaffected by lust. He understands mind affected by hate
as mind affected by hate, and mind unaffected by hate as mind
unaffected by hate. He understands mind affected by delusion
as mind affected by delusion, and mind unaffected by delusion
as mind unaffected by delusion. He understands contracted
mind as contracted mind, and distracted mind as distracted
mind. He understands exalted mind as exalted mind, and unex-
alted mind as unexalted mind. He understands surpassed mind
as surpassed mind, and unsurpassed mind as unsurpassed
mind. He understands concentrated mind as concentrated
mind, and unconcentrated mind as unconcentrated mind. He
understands liberated mind as liberated mind, and unliberated


i 60


The Foundations of Mindfulness 151


mind as unliberated mind. 155
(insight)

35. "In this way he abides contemplating mind as mind internally,
or he abides contemplating mind as mind externally, or he
abides contemplating mind as mind both internally and exter-
nally. Or else he abides contemplating in mind its arising fac-
tors, [60] or he abides contemplating in mind its vanishing fac-
tors, or he abides contemplating in mind both its arising and
vanishing factors. 156 Or else mindfulness that 'there is mind' is
simply established in him to the extent necessary for bare
knowledge and mindfulness. And he abides independent, not
clinging to anything in the world. That is how a bhikkhu abides
contemplating mind as mind.

(CONTEMPLATION OF MIND-OBJECTS)

(1. The Five Hindrances)

36. "And how, bhikkhus, does a bhikkhu abide contemplating
mind-objects as mind-objects? 157 Here a bhikkhu abides con-
templating mind-objects as mind-objects in terms of the five
hindrances. 158 And how does a bhikkhu abide contemplating
mind-objects as mind-objects in terms of the five hindrances?
Here, there being sensual desire in him, a bhikkhu understands:
'There is sensual desire in me'; or there being no sensual desire
in him, he understands: 'There is no sensual desire in me'; and
he also understands how there comes to be the arising of
unarisen sensual desire, and how there comes to be the aban-
doning of arisen sensual desire, and how there comes to be the
future non-arising of abandoned sensual desire.'

"There being ill will in him... There being sloth and torpor in
him. . .There being restlessness and remorse in him. . .There being
doubt in him, a bhikkhu understands: 'There is doubt in me'; or
there being no doubt in him, he understands: 'There is no doubt
in me'; and he understands how there comes to be the arising of
unarisen doubt, and how there comes to be the abandoning of
arisen doubt, and how there comes to be the future non-arising
of abandoned doubt.


152 Satipatthana Sutta: Sutta 10


i 61


(insight)

37. "In this way he abides contemplating mind-objects as mind-
objects internally, or he abides contemplating mind-objects as
mind-objects externally, or be abides contemplating mind-
objects as mind-objects both internally and externally. Or else he
abides contemplating in mind-objects their arising factors, or he
abides contemplating in mind-objects their vanishing factors, or
he abides contemplating in mind-objects both their arising and
vanishing factors. Or else mindfulness that 'there are mind-
objects' is simply established in him to the extent necessary for
bare knowledge and mindfulness. And he abides independent,
not clinging to anything in the world. That is how a bhikkhu
abides contemplating mind-objects as mind-objects in terms of
the five hindrances.

(2. The Five Aggregates)

38. "Again, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind-
objects as mind-objects [61] in terms of the five aggregates
affected by clinging. 159 And how does a bhikkhu abide con-
templating mind-objects as mind-objects in terms of the five
aggregates affected by clinging? Here a bhikkhu understands:
'Such is material form, such its origin, such its disappearance;
such is feeling, such its origin, such its disappearance; such is
perception, such its origifi, such its disappearance; such are
the formations, such their origin, such their disappearance;
such is consciousness, such its origin, such its disappearance.'

39. "In this way he abides contemplating mind-objects as
mind-objects internally, externally, and both internally and
externally... And he abides independent, not clinging to any-
thing in the world. That is how a bhikkhu abides contemplating
mind-objects as mind-objects in terms of the five aggregates
affected by clinging.

(3. The Six Bases)

40. "Again, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind-
objects as mind-objects in terms of the six internal and exter-
nal bases. 160 And how does a bhikkhu abide contemplating


i 62


The Foundations of Mindfulness 153


mind-objects as mind-objects in terms of the six internal and
external bases? Here a bhikkhu understands the eye, he under-
stands forms, and he understands the fetter that arises depen-
dent on both; and he also understands how there comes to be
the arising of the unarisen fetter, and how there comes to be the
abandoning of the arisen fetter, and how there comes to be the
future non-arising of the abandoned fetter.

"He understands the ear, he understands sounds... He under-
stands the nose, he understands odours... He understands the
tongue, he understands flavours... He understands the body, he
understands tangibles... He understands the mind, he under-
stands mind-objects, and he understands the fetter that arises
dependent on both; and he also understands how there comes to
be the arising of the unarisen fetter, and how there comes to be
the abandoning of the arisen fetter, and how there comes to be
the future non-arising of the abandoned fetter.

41. "In this way he abides contemplating mind-objects as
mind-objects internally, externally, and both internally and
externally... And he abides independent, not clinging to any-
thing in the world. That is how a bhikkhu abides contemplating
mind-objects as mind-objects in terms of the six internal and
external bases.

(4. The Seven Enlightenment Factors)

42. "Again, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind-
objects as mind-objects in terms of the seven enlightenment
factors. 161 And how does a bhikkhu abide contemplating
mind-objects as mind-objects in terms of the seven enlighten-
ment factors? Here, there being the mindfulness enlighten-
ment factor in him, a bhikkhu understands: 'There is the
mindfulness enlightenment factor in me'; or there being no
mindfulness enlightenment factor in him, he understands: [62]
'There is no mindfulness enlightenment factor in me'; and he
also understands how there comes to be the arising of the
unarisen mindfulness enlightenment factor, and how the
arisen mindfulness enlightenment factor comes to fulfilment
by development.

"There being the investigation-of-states enlightenment factor
in him 162 ... There being the energy enlightenment factor kf


154 Satipatthana Sutta: Sutta 10


i 62


him. ..There being the rapture enlightenment factor in
him... There being the tranquillity enlightenment factor in
him... There being the concentration enlightenment factor in
him. . .There being the equanimity enlightenment factor in him, a
bhikkhu understands: 'There is the equanimity enlightenment
factor in me'; or there being no equanimity enlightenment factor
in him, he understands: 'There is no equanimity enlightenment
factor in me'; and he also understands how there comes to be
the arising of the unarisen equanimity enlightenment factor, and
how the arisen equanimity enlightenment factor comes to fulfil-
ment by development. 163

43. "In this way he abides contemplating mind-objects as
mind-objects internally, externally, and both internally and
externally... And he abides independent, not clinging to any-
thing in the world. That is how a bhikkhu abides contemplating
mind-objects as mind-objects in terms of the seven enlighten-
ment factors.

t

(5. The Four Noble Truths)

44. "Again, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu abides contemplating mind-
objects as mind-objects in terms of the Four Noble Truths. 164
And how does a bhikkhu abide contemplating mind-objects as
mind-objects in terms of the Four Noble Truths? Here a bhikkhu
understands as it actually is: 'This is suffering'; he understands
as it actually is: 'This is thfe origin of suffering'; he understands
as it actually is: 'This is the cessation of suffering'; he under-
stands as it actually is: 'This is the way leading to the cessation
of suffering.'

(insight)

45. "In this way he abides contemplating mind-objects as mind-
objects internally, or he abides contemplating mind-objects as
mind-objects externally, or he abides contemplating mind-objects
as mind-objects both internally and externally. Or else he abides
contemplating in mind-objects their arising factors, or he abides
contemplating in mind-objects their vanishing factors, or he
abides contemplating in mind-objects both their arising and van-


l


The Foundations of Mindfulness 155


i 63

ishing factors. Or else mindfulness that 'there are mind-objects' is
simply established in him to the extent necessary for bare
]<nowledge and mindfulness. And he abides independent, not
clinging to anything in the world. That is how a bhikkhu abides
contemplating mind-objects as mind-objects in terms of the Four
Noble Truths.

(conclusion)

46. "Bhikkhus, if anyone should develop these four foundations
of mindfulness in such a way for seven years, one of two fruits
could be expected for him: either final knowledge here and now,
or if there is a trace of clinging left, non-return. 165

"Let alone seven years, bhikkhus. [63] If anyone should develop
these four foundations of mindfulness in such a way for six
years.. .for five years.. .for four years. ..for three years.. .for two
years. . .for one year, one of two fruits could be expected for him:
either final knowledge here and now, or if there is a trace of
clinging left, non-return.

"Let alone one year, bhikkhus. If anyone should develop these
four foundations of mindfulness in such a way for seven
months. . .for six months. . .for five months. . .for four months. . .for
three months... for two months... for one month... for half a
month, one of two fruits could be expected for him: either final
knowledge here and now, or if there is a trace of clinging left,
non-return.

"Let alone half a month, bhikkhus. If anyone should develop
these four foundations of mindfulness in such a way for seven
days, one of two fruits could be expected for him: either final
knowledge here and now, or if there is a trace of clinging left,
non-return.

47. "So it was with reference to this that it was said:
'Bhikkhus, this is the direct path for the purification of beings,
for the surmounting of sorrow and lamentation, for the disap-
pearance of pain and grief, for the attainment of the true way, for
the realisation of Nibbana - namely, the four foundations of
mindfulness.

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
■md delighted in the Blessed One's words.




The Division of the Lion's Roar

(Slhanadavagga)




11 Culasthanada Sutta
The Shorter Discourse
on the Lion's Roar



1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Savatthi in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There he
addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, only here is there a recluse, only here a second
recluse, only here a third recluse, only here a fourth recluse. The
doctrines of others are devoid [64] of recluses: that is how you
should rightly roar your lion's roar. 166

3. "It is possible, bhikkhus, that wanderers of other sects
might ask: 'But on the strength of what [argument] or with the
support of what [authority] do the venerable ones say thus?'
Wanderers of other sects who ask thus may be answered in this
way: 'Friends, four things have been declared to us by the
Blessed One who knows and sees, accomplished and fully
enlightened; on seeing these in ourselves we say thus: "Only
here is there a recluse, only here a second recluse, only here a
third recluse, only here a fourth recluse. The doctrines of others
are devoid of recluses." What are the four? We have confidence
in the Teacher, we have confidence in the Dhamma, we have
fulfilled the precepts, and our companions in the Dhamma are
dear and agreeable to us whether they are laymen or those gone
forth. These are the four things declared to us by the Blessed
One who knows and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened,
on seeing which in ourselves we say as we do.'

4. "It is possible, bhikkhus, that wanderers of other sects
might say thus: 'Friends, we too have confidence in the Teacher,
that is, in our Teacher; we too have confidence in the Dhamma,
that is, in our Dhamma; we too have fulfilled the precepts, that
is, our precepts; and our companions in the Dhamma are dear
and agreeable to us too whether they are laymen or those gone

159


160 Culasihanada Sutta: Sutta 11

forth. What is the distinction here, friends, what is the variance,
what is the difference between you and us?'

5. "Wanderers of other sects who ask thus may be answered in
this way: 'How then, friends, is the goal one or many?' Answer-
ing rightly, the wanderers of other sects would answer thus:
'Friends, the goal is one, not many.' 167 - 'But, friends, is that goal
for one affected by lust or free from lust?' Answering rightly, the
wanderers of other sects would answer thus: 'Friends, that goal
is for one free from lust, not for one affected by lust.' - 'But,
friends, is that goal for one affected by hate or free from hate?'
Answering rightly, they would answer: 'Friends, that goal is for
one free from hate, not for one affected by hate.' - 'But, friends,
is that goal for one affected by delusion or free from delusion?'
Answering rightly, they would answer: 'Friends, that goal is for
one free from delusion, not for one affected by delusion.' - 'But,
friends, is that goal for one affected by craving or free from crav-
ing?' [65] Answering rightly, they would answer: 'Friends, that
goal is for one free from craving, not for one affected by crav-
ing.' - 'But, friends, is that goal for one affected by clinging or
free from clinging?' Answering rightly, they would answer:
'Friends, that goal is for one free from clinging, not for one
affected by clinging.' - 'But, friends, is that goal for one who has
vision or for one without vision?' Answering rightly, they
would answer: 'Friends, that goal is for one with vision, not for
one without vision.' - 'But, friends, is that goal for one who
favours and opposes, or for one who does not favour and
oppose?' Answering rightly, they would answer: 'Friends, that
goal is for one who does not favour and oppose, not for one who
favours and opposes.' 168 - 'But, friends, is that goal for one who
delights in and enjoys proliferation, or for one who does not
delight in and enjoy proliferation?' Answering rightly, they
would answer: 'Friends, that goal is for one who does not
delight in and enjoy proliferation, not for one who delights in
and enjoys proliferation.' 169

6. "Bhikkhus, there are these two views: the view of being and
the view of non-being. Any recluses or brahmins who rely on
the view of being, adopt the view of being, accept the view of
being, are opposed to the view of non-being. Any recluses or
brahmins who rely on the view of non-being, adopt the view of



f



The Shorter Discourse on the Lion's Roar 161


i 66

non-being, accept the view of non-being, are opposed to the
view of being. 170

7. "Any recluses or brahmins who do not understand as they
actually are the origin, the disappearance, the gratification, the
danger, and the escape 171 in the case of these two views are
affected by lust, affected by hate, affected by delusion, affected
by craving, affected by clinging, without vision, given to favour-
ing and opposing, and they delight in and enjoy proliferation.
They are not freed from birth, ageing, and death; from sorrow,
lamentation, pain, grief, and despair; they are not freed from
suffering, I say.

8. "Any recluses or brahmins who understand as they actually
are the origin, the disappearance, the gratification, the danger,
and the escape in the case of these two views are without lust,
without hate, without delusion, without craving, without cling-
ing, with vision, not given to favouring and opposing, and they
do not delight in and enjoy proliferation. They are freed from
birth, ageing, and death; from sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief,
and despair; they are freed from suffering, I say. [66]

9. "Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of clinging. What
four? Clinging to sensual pleasures, clinging to views, clinging
to rules and observances, and clinging to a doctrine of self.

10. "Though certain recluses and brahmins claim to propound
the full understanding of all kinds of clinging, they do not com-
pletely describe the full understanding of all kinds of clinging. 172
They describe the full understanding of clinging to sensual plea-
sures without describing the full understanding of clinging to
views, clinging to rules and observances, and clinging to a doc-
trine of self. Why is that? Those good recluses and brahmins do
not understand these three instances of clinging as they actually
are. Therefore, though they claim to propound the full under-
standing of all kinds of clinging, they describe only the full
understanding of clinging to sensual pleasures without describ-
ing the full understanding of clinging to views, clinging to rules
and observances, and clinging to a doctrine of self.

11. "Though certain recluses and brahmins claim to propound
the full understanding of all kinds of clinging... they describe the
full understanding of clinging to sensual pleasures and clinging
to views without describing the full understanding of clinging


162 Culasihanada Sutta: Sutta 11


i 67


to rules and observances and clinging to a doctrine of self. Why
is that? They do not under stand two instances... therefore they
describe only the full understanding of clinging to sensual plea-
sures and clinging to views without describing the full under-
standing of clinging to rules and observances and clinging to a
doctrine of self.

12. "Though certain recluses and brahmins claim to propound
the full understanding of all kinds of clinging... they describe
the full understanding of clinging to sensual pleasures, clinging
to views, and clinging to rules and observances without describ-
ing the full understanding of clinging to a doctrine of self. They
do not understand one instance... therefore they describe only
the full understanding of dinging to sensual pleasures, clinging
to views, and clinging to rules and observances without describ-
ing the full understanding of clinging to a doctrine of self. 173

13. "Bhikkhus, in such a Dhamma and Discipline as that, it is
plain that confidence in the Teacher is not rightly directed, that
confidence in the Dhamma is not rightly directed, that fulfil-
ment of the precepts is not rightly directed, and that the affec-
tion among companions in the Dhamma is not rightly directed.
Why is that? Because that is how it is when the Dhamma and
Discipline is [67] badly proclaimed and badly expounded,
unemancipating, unconducive to peace, expounded by one who
is not fully enlightened.

14. "Bhikkhus, when a Tathagata, accomplished and fully
enlightened, claims to propound the full understanding of all
kinds of clinging, he completely describes the full understand-
ing of all kinds of clinging: he describes the full understanding
of clinging to sensual pleasures, clinging to views, clinging to
rules and observances, and clinging to a doctrine of self. 174

15. "Bhikkhus, in such a Dhamma and Discipline as that, it is
plain that confidence in the Teacher is rightly directed, that con-
fidence in the Dhamma is rightly directed, that fulfilment of the
precepts is rightly directed, and that the affection among com-
panions in the Dhamma is rightly directed. Why is that?
Because that is how it is when the Dhamma and Discipline is
well-proclaimed and well-expounded, emancipating, conducive
to peace, expounded by one who is fully enlightened.

16. "Now these four kinds of clinging have what as their source,
what as their origin, from what are they born and produced?



• frg The Shorter Discourse on the Lion's Roar 163

These four kinds of clinging have craving as their source, crav-
ing as their origin, they are bom and produced from craving. 175
Craving has what as its source...? Craving has feeling as its
source... Feeling has what as its source...? Feeling has contact as
its source... Contact has what as its source...? Contact has the
sixfold base as its source... The sixfold base has what as its
source...? The sixfold base has mentality-materiality as its
source. . .Mentality-materiality has what as its source. . .? Mentality-
materiality has consciousness as its source... Consciousness has
what as its source...? Consciousness has formations as its
source... Formations have what as their source...? Formations
have ignorance as their source, ignorance as their origin, they
are born and produced from ignorance.

17. "Bhikkhus, when ignorance is abandoned and true knowl-
edge has arisen in a bhikkhu, then with the fading away of igno-
rance and tire arising of true knowledge he no longer clings to
sensual pleasures, no longer clings to views, no longer clings to
rules and observances, no longer clings to a doctrine of self. 176
When he does not cling, he is not agitated. When he is not agi-
tated, he personally attains Nibbana. Fie understands: 'Birth is
destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has
been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.'" [68]


That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


12 Mahasthanada Sutta
The Greater Discourse
on the Lion's Roar

1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Vesall in the grove outside the city to the west.

2. Now on that occasion Sunakkhatta, son of the Licchavis,
had recently left this Dhamma and Discipline. 177 He was making
this statement before the Vesall assembly: "The recluse Gotama
does not have any superhuman states, any distinction in knowl-
edge and vision worthy of the noble ones. 178 The recluse
Gotama teaches a Dhamma [merely] hammered out by reason-
ing, following his own line of inquiry as it occurs to him, and
when he teaches the Dhamma to anyone, it leads him when he
practises it to the complete destruction of suffering." 179

3. Then, when it was morning, the venerable Sariputta
dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Vesall
for alms. Then he heard Sunakkhatta, son of the Licchavis, mak-
ing this statement before the Vesall assembly. When he had wan-
dered for alms in Vesall and had returned from his almsround,
after his meal he went to ’the Blessed One, and after paying
homage to him, he sat down at one side and told the Blessed
One what Sunakkhatta was saying.

4. [The Blessed One said:] "Sariputta, the misguided man
Sunakkhatta is angry and his words are spoken out of anger.
Thinking to discredit the Tathagata, he actually praises him; [69]
for it is praise of the Tathagata to say of him: 'When he teaches
the Dhamma to anyone, it leads him when he practises it to the
complete destruction of suffering/

5. "Sariputta, this misguided man Sunakkhatta will never
infer of me according to Dhamma: 'That Blessed One is
accomplished, fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge
and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader


164


i 69


The Greater Discourse on the Lion's Roar 165


of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlight-
ened, blessed.' 180

6. "And he will never infer of me according to Dhamma: 'That
Blessed One enjoys the various kinds of supernormal power:
having been one, he becomes many; having been many, he
becomes one; he appears and vanishes; he goes unhindered
through a wall, through an enclosure, through a mountain, as
though through space; he dives in and out of the earth as
though it were water; he walks on water without sinking as
though it were earth; seated cross-legged, he travels in space
like a bird; with his hand he touches and strokes the moon and
sun so powerful and mighty; he wields bodily mastery even as
far as the Brahma-world.'

7. "And he will never infer of me according to Dhamma: 'With
the divine ear element, which is purified and surpasses the
human, that Blessed One hears both kinds of sounds, the heav-
enly and the human, those that are far as well as near.'

8. "And he will never infer of me according to Dhamma: 'That
Blessed One encompasses with his own mind the minds of other
beings, other persons. He understands a mind affected by lust as
affected by lust and a mind unaffected by lust as unaffected by
lust; he understands a mind affected by hate as affected by hate
and a mind unaffected by hate as unaffected by hate; he under-
stands a mind affected by delusion as affected by delusion and a
mind unaffected by delusion as unaffected by delusion; he
understands a contracted mind as contracted and a distracted
mind as distracted; he understands an exalted mind as exalted
and an unexalted mind as unexalted; he understands a surpassed
mind as surpassed and an unsurpassed mind as unsurpassed; he
understands a concentrated mind as concentrated and an uncon-
centrated mind as unconcentrated; he understands a liberated
mind as liberated and an unliberated mind as unliberated.'

(ten powers of a tathAgata)

9. "Sariputta, the Tathagata has these ten Tathagata's powers,
possessing which he claims the herd-leader's place, roars his
lion's roar in the assemblies, and sets rolling the Wheel of
Brahma. 181 What are the ten?


166 Mahasihanada Sutta: Sutta 12


i 71


10. (1) "Here, the Tathagata understands as it actually is the
possible as possible and the impossible as impossible. 182 And
that [70] is a Tathagata's power that the Tathagata has, by virtue
of which he claims the herd-leader's place, roars his lion's roar
in the assemblies, and sets rolling the Wheel of Brahma.

11. (2) "Again, the Tathagata understands as it actually is the
results of actions undertaken, past, future, and present, with pos-
sibilities and with causes. That too is a Tathagata's power. . , 183

12. (3) "Again, the Tathagata understands as it actually is the
ways leading to all destinations. That too is a Tathagata's
power... 184

13. (4) "Again, the Tathagata understands as it actually is the
world with its many and different elements. That too is a Tatha-
gata's power... 185

14. (5) "Again, the Tathagata understands as it actually is
how beings have different inclinations. That too is a
Tathagata's power. . , 186

15. (6) "Again, the Tathagata understands as it actually is the
disposition of the faculties of other beings, other persons. That
too is a Tathagata's power. . , 187

16. (7) "Again, the Tathagata understands as it actually is the
defilement, the cleansing, and the emergence in regard to the
jhanas, liberations, concentrations, and attainments. That too is a
Tathagata's power. . , 188

17. (8) "Again, the Tathagata recollects his manifold past lives,
that is, one birth, two birthp...(os Sutta 4, §27 ). ..Thus with their
aspects and particulars he recollects his manifold past lives. That
too is a Tathagata's power. . .

18. (9) "Again, with the divine eye, which is purified and sur-
passes the human, the Tathagata sees beings passing away and
reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and
unfortunate ... (as Sutta 4, §29) [71], ..and he understands how
beings pass on according to their actions. That too is a Tatha-
gata's power. . .

19. (10) "Again, by realising for himself with direct knowl-
edge, the Tathagata here and now enters upon and abides in the
deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taint-
less with the destruction of the taints. That too is a Tathagata's
power that the Tathagata has, by virtue of which he claims the


i



i 72


The Greater Discourse on the Lion's Roar 167


herd-leader's place, roars his lion's roar in the assemblies, and
sets rolling the Wheel of Brahma.

20. "The Tathagata has these ten Tathagata's powers, possess-
ing which he claims the herd-leader's place, roars his lion's roar
in the assemblies, and sets rolling the Wheel of Brahma.

21. "Sariputta, when I know and see thus, should anyone say
of me: 'The recluse Gotama does not have any superhuman
states, any distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the
noble ones. The recluse Gotama teaches a Dhamma [merely]
hammered out by reasoning, following his own line of inquiry as
it occurs to him' - unless he abandons that assertion and that
state of mind and relinquishes that view, then as [surely as if he
had been] carried off and put there he will wind up in hell. 189
Just as a bhikkhu possessed of virtue, concentration, and wisdom
would here and now enjoy final knowledge, so it will happen in
this case, I say, that unless he abandons that assertion and that
state of mind and relinquishes that view, then as [surely as if he
had been] carried off and put there he will wind up in hell.

(FOUR KINDS OF INTREPIDITY)

22. "Sariputta, the Tathagata has these four kinds of intrepidity,
possessing which he claims the herd-leader's place, roars his
lion's roar in the assemblies, and sets rolling the Wheel of
Brahma. What are the four?

23. "Here, I see no ground on which any recluse or brahmin or
god or Mara or Brahma or anyone else at all in the world could,
in accordance with the Dhamma, accuse me thus: 'While you
claim full enlightenment, you are not fully enlightened in regard
to certain things.' [72] And seeing no ground for that, I abide in
safety, fearlessness, and intrepidity.

24. "I see no ground on which any recluse... or anyone at all
could accuse me thus: 'While you claim to have destroyed the
taints, these taints are undestroyed by you.' And seeing no
ground for that, I abide in safety, fearlessness, and intrepidity.

25. "I see no ground on which any recluse... or anyone at all
could accuse me thus: 'Those things called obstructions by you
are not able to obstruct one who engages in them.' And seeing no
ground for that, I abide in safety, fearlessness, and intrepidity.


168 Mahasihanada Sutta: Sutta 12


i 73


26. "I see no ground on which any recluse... or anyone at all
could accuse me thus: 'When you teach the Dhamma to some-
one, it does not lead him when he practises it to the complete
destruction of suffering.' And seeing no ground for that, I abide
in safety, fearlessness, and intrepidity.

27. "A Tathagata has these four kinds of intrepidity, possess-
ing which he claims the herd-leader's place, roars his lion's roar
in the assemblies, and sets rolling the Wheel of Brahma.

28. "Sariputta, when I know and see thus, should anyone say
of me. . .he will wind up in hell.

(the eight assemblies)

29. "Sariputta, there are these eight assemblies. What are the eight?
An assembly of nobles, an assembly of brahmins, an assembly of
householders, an assembly of recluses, an assembly of gods of the
heaven of the Four Great Kings, an assembly of gods of the heaven
of the Thirty-three, an assembly of Mara's retinue, an assembly of
Brahmas. Possessing these four kinds of intrepidity, the Tathagata
approaches and enters these eight assemblies.

30. "I recall having approached many hundred assemblies of
nobles... many hundred assemblies of brahmins... many hun-
dred assemblies of householders... many hundred assemblies of
recluses... many hundred assemblies of gods of the heaven of
the Four Great Kings... many hundred assemblies of gods of the
heaven of the Thirty-three. . .many hundred assemblies of Mara's
retinue... many hundred assemblies of Brahmas. And formerly I
had sat with them there and talked with them and held conver-
sations with them, yet I see no ground for thinking that fear or
timidity might come upon me there. And seeing no ground for
that, I abide in safety, fearlessness, and intrepidity. [73]

31. "Sariputta, when I know and see thus, should anyone say
of me . . .he will wind up in hell.

(four kinds of generation)

32. "Sariputta, there are these four kinds of generation. What are
the four? Egg-born generation, womb-bom generation, moisture-
bom generation, and spontaneous generation.


173


The Greater Discourse on the Lion's Roar 169


33 . "What is egg-born generation? There are these beings born
by breaking out of the shell of an egg; this is called egg-born
generation. What is womb-born generation? There are these
beings born by breaking out from the caul; this is called womb-
bom generation. What is moisture-born generation? There are
these beings born in a rotten fish, in a rotten corpse, in rotten
dough, in a cesspit, or in a sewer; this is called moisture-bom
generation. What is spontaneous generation? There are gods
and denizens of hell and certain human beings and some beings
in the lower worlds; this is called spontaneous generation. These
are the four kinds of generation.

34. "Sariputta, when I know and see thus, should anyone say
of me. . .he will wind up in hell.

(THE FIVE DESTINATIONS AND NIBBANA)

35. "Sariputta, there are these five destinations. What are the
five? Hell, the animal realm, the realm of ghosts, human beings,
and gods. 190

36. (1) "I understand hell, and the path and way leading to hell.
And I also understand how one who has entered this path will,
on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in a state of
deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, in hell.

(2) "I understand the animal realm, and the path and way
leading to the animal realm. And I also understand how one
who has entered this path will, on the dissolution of the body,
after death, reappear in the animal realm.

(3) "I understand the realm of ghosts, and the path and way
leading to the realm of ghosts. And I also understand how one
who has entered this path will, on the dissolution of the body,
after death, reappear in the realm of ghosts.

(4) "1 understand human beings, and the path and way lead-
ing to the human world. And I also understand how one who
has entered this path will, on the dissolution of the body, after
death, reappear among human beings.

(5) "I understand the gods, and the path and way leading to
the world of the gods. And I also understand how one who has
entered this path will, on the dissolution of the body, after
death, reappear in a happy destination, in the heavenly world.


170 Mahasihanada Sutta: Sutta 12


i 75


(6) "I understand Nibbana, and the path and way leading to
Nibbana. [74] And I also understand how one who has entered
this path will, by realising for himself with direct knowledge,
here and now enter upon and abide in the deliverance of mind
and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruc-
tion of the taints.

37. (1) "By encompassing mind with mind I understand a cer-

tain person thus: 'This person so behaves, so conducts himself,
has taken such a path that on the dissolution of the body, after
death, he will reappear in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy
destination, in perdition, in hell.' And then later on, with the
divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, I see that
on the dissolution of the body, after death, he has reappeared in
a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition,
in hell, and is experiencing extremely 191 painful, racking, pierc-
ing feelings. Suppose there were a charcoal pit deeper than a
man's height full of glowing coals without flame or smoke; and
then a man scorched and exhausted by hot weather, weary,
parched, and thirsty, came by a path going in one way only and
directed to that same charcoal pit. Then a man with good sight
on seeing him would say: 'This person so behaves, so conducts
himself, has taken such a path, that he will come to this same
charcoal pit'; and then later on he sees that he has fallen into
that charcoal pit and is experiencing extremely painful, racking,
piercing feelings. So too, by encompassing mind with mind...
piercing feelings. 1

38. (2) "By encompassing mind with mind I understand a cer-
tain person thus: 'This person so behaves, so conducts himself,
has taken such a path that on the dissolution of the body, after
death, he will reappear in the animal realm.' And then later on,
with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human,
I see that on the dissolution of the body, after death, he has reap-
peared in the animal realm and is experiencing extremely
painful, racking, piercing feelings. Suppose there were a cesspit
deeper than a man's height full of filth; and then a man [75]
scorched and exhausted by hot weather, weary, parched, and
thirsty, came by a path going in one way only and directed to
that same cesspit. Then a man with good sight on seeing him
would say: 'This person so behaves... that he will come to this
same cesspit'; and then later on he sees that he has fallen into


i 76


The Greater Discourse on the Lion's Roar 171


that cesspit and is experiencing extremely painful, racking,
piercing feelings. So too, by encompassing mind with mind...
piercing feelings.

39. (3) "By encompassing mind with mind I understand a cer-
tain person thus: 'This person so behaves, so conducts himself,
has taken such a path that on the dissolution of the body, after
death, he will reappear in the realm of ghosts.' And then later
on... I see that... he has reappeared in the realm of ghosts and is
experiencing much painful feeling. Suppose there were a tree
growing on uneven ground with scanty foliage casting a dap-
pled shadow; and then a man scorched and exhausted by hot
weather, weary, parched, and thirsty, came by a path going in
one way only and directed to that same tree. Then a man with
good sight on seeing him would say: 'This person so behaves...
that he will come to this same tree'; and then later on he sees
that he is sitting or lying in the shade of that tree experiencing
much painful feeling. So too, by encompassing mind with mind
. . .much painful feeling.

40. (4) "By encompassing mind with mind I understand a cer-
tain person thus: 'This person so behaves, so conducts himself,
has taken such a path that on the dissolution of the body, after
death, he will reappear among human beings.' And then later
on... I see that... he has reappeared among human beings and is
experiencing much pleasant feeling. Suppose there were a tree
growing on even ground with thick foliage casting a deep
shade; and then a man scorched and exhausted by hot weather,
weary, parched, and thirsty, came by a path going in one way
only and directed to that same tree. Then a man with good sight
on seeing him would say: 'This person so behaves... that he will
come to this same tree'; and then later on he sees that he is sit-
ting or lying in the shade of that tree experiencing much pleas-
ant feeling. So too, by encompassing mind with mind... much
pleasant feeling. [76]

41. (5) "By encompassing mind with mind I understand a cer-
tain person thus: 'This person so behaves, so conducts himself,
has taken such a path that on the dissolution of the body, after
death, he will reappear in a happy destination, in the heavenly
world.' And then later on... I see that... he has reappeared in a
happy destination, in the heavenly world, and is experiencing
extremely pleasant feelings. Suppose there were a mansion, and




172 Mahasthanada Sutta: Sutta 12


i 77


1


it had an upper chamber plastered within and without, shut off,
secured by bars, with shuttered windows, and in it there was a
couch spread with rugs, blankets, and sheets, with a deerskin
coverlet, with a canopy as well as crimson pillows for both
[head and feet]; and then a man scorched and exhausted by hot
weather, weary, parched, and thirsty, came by a path going in
one way only and directed to that same mansion. Then a man
with good sight on seeing him would say: 'This person so
behaves. . .that he will come to this same mansion'; and then later
on he sees that he is sitting or lying in that upper chamber in that
mansion experiencing extremely pleasant feelings. So too, by
encompassing mind with mind. . .extremely pleasant feelings.

42. (6) "By encompassing mind with mind I understand a cer-
tain person thus: 'This person so behaves, so conducts himself,
has taken such a path that by realising for himself with direct
knowledge, he here and now will enter upon and abide in the
deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taint-
less with the destruction of the taints.' And then later on I see
that by realising for himself with direct knowledge, he here and
now enters upon and abides in the deliverance of mind and
deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of
the taints, and is experiencing extremely pleasant feelings. 192
Suppose there were a pond with clean, agreeable, cool water,
transparent, with smooth banks, delightful, and nearby a dense
wood; and then a man scorched and exhausted by hot weather,
weary, parched, and thirsty, came by a path going in one way
only towards that same pond. Then a man with good sight on
seeing him would say: 'This person so behaves... that he will
come to this same pond'; and then later on he sees that he has
plunged into the pond, bathed, drunk, and relieved all his dis-
tress, fatigue, and fever and has come out again and is sitting or
lying in the wood [77] experiencing extremely pleasant feelings.
So too, by encompassing mind with mind... extremely pleasant
feelings. These are the five destinations.

43. "Sariputta, when I know and see thus, should anyone say
of me: 'The recluse Gotama does not have any superhuman
states, any distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the
noble ones. The recluse Gotama teaches a Dhamma [merely]
hammered out by reasoning, following his own line of inquiry
as it occurs to him' - unless he abandons that assertion and that



i 78


The Greater Discourse on the Lion's Roar 173


state of mind and relinquishes that view, then as [surely as if he
had been] carried off and put there he will wind up in hell. Just
as a bhikkhu possessed of virtue, concentration, and wisdom
would here and now enjoy final knowledge, so it will happen in
this case, I say, that unless he abandons that assertion and that
state of mind and relinquishes that view, then as [surely as if he
had been] carried off and put there he will wind up in hell.

(the bodhisatta's austerities)

44. "Sariputta, I recall having lived a holy life possessing four
factors. I have practised asceticism - the extreme of asceticism; I
have practised coarseness - the extreme of coarseness; I have
practised scrupulousness - the extreme of scrupulousness; I
have practised seclusion - the extreme of seclusion. 193

45. "Such was my asceticism, Sariputta, that I went naked,
rejecting conventions, licking my hands, not coming when
asked, not stopping when asked; I did not accept food brought
or food specially made or an invitation to a meal; I received
nothing from a pot, from a bowl, across a threshold, across a
stick, across a pestle, from two eating together, from a pregnant
woman, from a woman giving suck, from a woman lying with a
man, from where food was advertised to be distributed, from
where a dog was waiting, from where flies were buzzing; I
accepted no fish or meat, I drank no liquor, wine, or fermented
brew. I kept to one house, to one morsel; I kept to two [78] hous-
es, to two morsels;... I kept to seven houses, to seven morsels. I
lived on one saucerful a day, on two saucerfuls a day... on seven
saucerfuls a day; I took food once a day, once every two
days... once every seven days, and so on up to once every fort-
night; I dwelt pursuing the practice of taking food at stated
intervals. I was an eater of greens or millet or wild rice or hide-
parings or moss or ricebran or rice-scum or sesamum flour or
grass or cowdung. I lived on forest roots and fruits; I fed on
fallen fruits. I clothed myself in hemp, in hemp-mixed cloth, in
shrouds, in refuse rags, in tree bark, in antelope hide, in strips
of antelope hide, in kusa-grass fabric, in bark fabric, in wood-
shavings fabric, in head-hair wool, in animal wool, in owls'
wings. I was one who pulled out hair and beard, pursuing the
practice of pulling out hair and beard. I was one who stood


174 Mahasihanada Sutta: Sutta 12


i 79


continuously, rejecting seats. I was one who squatted continu-
ously, devoted to maintaining the squatting position. I was one
who used a mattress of spikes; I made a mattress of spikes my
bed. I dwelt pursuing the practice of bathing in water three times
daily including the evening. Thus in such a variety of ways I
dwelt pursuing the practice of tormenting and mortifying the
body. Such was my asceticism.

46. "Such was my coarseness, Sariputta, that just as the bole of
a tinduka tree, accumulating over the years, cakes and flakes off,
so too, dust and dirt, accumulating over the years, caked off my
body and flaked off. It never occurred to me: 'Oh, let me rub this
dust and dirt off with my hand, or let another rub this dust and
dirt off with his hand' - it never occurred to me thus. Such was
my coarseness.

47. "Such was my scrupulousness, Sariputta, that I was always
mindful in stepping forwards and stepping backwards. I was
full of pity even for [the beings in] a drop of water thus: 'Let me
not hurt the tiny creatures in the crevices of the ground.' Such
was my scrupulousness.

48. "Such was my seclusion, Sariputta, that [79] I would
plunge into some forest and dwell there. And when I saw a
cowherd or a shepherd or someone gathering grass or sticks, or
a woodsman, I would flee from grove to grove, from thicket to
thicket, from hollow to hollow, from hillock to hillock. Why
was that? So that they should not see me or I see them. Just as a
forest-bred deer, on seeing human beings, flees from grove to
grove, from thicket to thicket, from hollow to hollow, from
hillock to hillock, so too, when I saw a cowherd or a shep-
herd.. .Such was my seclusion.

49. "I would go on all fours to the cow-pens when the cattle
had gone out and the cowherd had left them, and I would feed
on the dung of the young suckling calves. As long as my own
excrement and urine lasted, I fed on my own excrement and
urine. Such was my great distortion in feeding.

50. "I would plunge into some awe-inspiring grove and dwell
there - a grove so awe-inspiring that normally it would make a
man's hair stand up if he were not free from lust. When those
cold wintry nights came during the 'eight-days interval of frost,'
I would dwell by night in the open and by day in the grove. 194
In the last month of the hot season I would dwell by day in the


i 80


The Greater Discourse on the Lion's Roar 1 75


open and by night in the grove. And there came to me sponta-
neously this stanza never heard before:

'Chilled by night and scorched by day.

Alone in awe-inspiring groves.

Naked, no fire to sit beside.

The sage yet pursues his quest/

51. "I would make my bed in a charnel ground with the bones
of the dead for a pillow. And cowherd boys came up and spat
on me, urinated on me, threw dirt at me, and poked sticks into
my ears. Yet I do not recall that I ever aroused an evil mind [of
hate] against them. Such was my abiding in equanimity. [80]

52. "Sariputta, there are certain recluses and brahmins whose
doctrine and view is this: 'Purification comes about through
food.' 195 They say: 'Let us live on kola-fruits,' and they eat kola-
fruits, they eat kola-fruit powder, they drink kola-fruit water,
and they make many kinds of kola-fruit concoctions. Now I
recall having eaten a single kola-fruit a day. Sariputta, you may
think that the kola-fruit was bigger at that time, yet you should
not regard it so: the kola-fruit was then at most the same size as
now. Through feeding on a single kola-fruit a day, my body
reached a state of extreme emaciation. Because of eating so little
my limbs became like the jointed segments of vine stems or
bamboo stems. Because of eating so little my backside became
like a camel's hoof. Because of eating so little the projections on
my spine stood forth like corded beads. Because of eating so lit-
tle my ribs jutted out as gaunt as the crazy rafters of an old roof-
less barn. Because of eating so little the gleam of my eyes sank
far down in their sockets, looking like a gleam of water that has
sunk far down in a deep well. Because of eating so little my
scalp shrivelled and withered as a green bitter gourd shrivels
and withers in the wind and sun. Because of eating so little my
belly skin adhered to my backbone; thus if I touched my belly
skin I encountered my backbone, and if I touched my backbone
I encountered my belly skin. Because of eating so little, if I tried
to ease my body by rubbing my limbs with my hands, the hair,
rotted at its roots, fell from my body as I rubbed.

53-55. "Sariputta, there are certain recluses and brahmins
whose doctrine and view is this: 'Purification comes about


176 Mahasihanada Sutta: Sutta 12


i 82


through food.' They say: 'Let us live on beans/... 'Let us live on
sesamum/...'Let us live on rice/ and they eat rice, they eat rice
powder, [81] they drink rice water, and they make many kinds
of rice concoctions. Now I recall having eaten a single rice grain
a day. Sariputta, you may think that the rice grain was bigger at
that time, yet you should not regard it so: the rice grain was
then at most the same size as now. Through feeding on a single
rice grain a day, my body reached a state of extreme emaciation.
Because of eating so little... the hair, rotted at its roots, fell from
my body as I rubbed.

56. "Yet, Sariputta, by such conduct, by such practice, by such
performance of austerities, I did not attain any superhuman
states, any distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the
noble ones. Why was that? Because I did not attain that noble
wisdom which when attained is noble and emancipating and
leads the one who practises in accordance with it to the com-
plete destruction of suffering.

57. "Sariputta, there are certain recluses and brahmins whose
doctrine and view is this: 'Purification comes about through the
round of rebirths.' But it is impossible to find a realm in the
round that I have not already [82] passed through in this long
journey, except for the gods of the Pure Abodes; and had I
passed through the round as a god in the Pure Abodes, I would
never have returned to this world. 196

58. "There are certain recluses and brahmins whose doctrine
and view is this: 'Purification comes about through [some par-
ticular kind of] rebirth/ But it is impossible to find a kind of
rebirth that I have not been reborn in already in this long jour-
ney, except for the gods of the Pure Abodes. . .

59. "There are certain recluses and brahmins whose doctrine
and view is this: 'Purification comes about through [some particu-
lar] abode.' But it is impossible to find a kind of abode that I have
not already dwelt in... except for the gods of the Pure Abodes...

60. "There are certain recluses and brahmins whose doctrine
and view is this: 'Purification comes about through sacrifice.'
But it is impossible to find a kind of sacrifice that has not
already been offered up by me in this long journey, when I was
either a head-anointed noble king or a well-to-do brahmin.

61. "There are certain recluses and brahmins whose doctrine
and view is this: 'Purification comes through fire-worship.' But



i 83


The Greater Discourse on the Lion's Roar 177


it is impossible to find a kind of fire that has not already been
worshipped by me in this long journey, when I was either a
head-anointed noble king or a well-to-do brahmin.

62. "Sariputta, there are certain recluses and brahmins whose
doctrine and view is this: 'As long as this good man is still
young, a black-haired young man endowed with the blessing of
youth, in the prime of life, so long is he perfect in his lucid wis-
dom. But when this good man is old, aged, burdened with
years, advanced in life, and come to the last stage, being eighty,
ninety, or a hundred years old, then the lucidity of his wisdom
is lost.' But it should not be regarded so. I am now old, aged,
burdened with years, advanced in life, and come to the last
stage: my years have turned eighty. Now suppose that I had
four disciples with a hundred years' lifespan, perfect in mind-
fulness, retentiveness, memory, and lucidity of wisdom. 197 Just
as a skilled archer, trained, practised, and tested, could easily
shoot a light arrow across the shadow of a palm tree, suppose
that they were even to that extent perfect in mindfulness, reten-
tiveness, [83] memory, and lucidity of wisdom. Suppose that
they continuously asked me about the four foundations of
mindfulness and that I answered them when asked and that
they remembered each answer of mine and never asked a sub-
sidiary question or paused except to eat, drink, consume food,
taste, urinate, defecate, and rest in order to remove sleepiness
and tiredness. Still the Tathagata's exposition of the Dhamma,
his explanations of factors of the Dhamma, and his replies to
questions would not yet come to an end, but meanwhile those
four disciples of mine with their hundred years' lifespan would
have died at the end of those hundred years. Sariputta, even if
you have to carry me about on a bed, still there will be no
change in the lucidity of the Tathagata's wisdom.

63. "Rightly speaking, were it to be said of anyone: 'A being
not subject to delusion has appeared in the world for the welfare
and happiness of many, out of compassion for the world, for the
good, welfare, and happiness of gods and humans,' it is of me
indeed that rightly speaking this should be said."

64. Now on that occasion the venerable Nagasamala was
standing behind the Blessed One fanning him. 198 Then he said to
the Blessed One: "It is wonderful, venerable sir, it is marvellous!
As I listened to this discourse on the Dhamma, the hairs of my


178 Malmsthanada Sutta: Sutta 12


i 83


body stood up. Venerable sir, what is the name of this discourse
on the Dhamma?"

"As to that, Nagasamala, you may remember this discourse
on the Dhamma as 'The Hair-raising Discourse/" 199

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Nagasamala
was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


13 Mahadukkhakkhandha Sutta
The Greater Discourse
on the Mass of Suffering


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.

2. Then, when it was morning, a number of bhikkhus dressed,
and taking their bowls and outer robes, [84] went into SavatthI
for alms. Then they thought: "It is still too early to wander for
alms in SavatthI. Suppose we went to the park of the wanderers
of other sects." So they went to the park of the wanderers of
other sects and exchanged greetings with the wanderers. When
this courteous and amiable talk was finished, they sat down at
one side. The wanderers said to them:

3. "Friends, the recluse Gotama describes the full understand-
ing of sensual pleasures, and we do so too; the recluse Gotama
describes the full understanding of material form, and we do so
too; the recluse Gotama describes the full understanding of feel-
ings, and we do so too. What then is the distinction here,
friends, what is the variance, what is the difference between the
recluse Gotama's teaching of the Dhamma and ours, between
his instructions and ours?" 200

4. Then those bhikkhus neither approved nor disapproved of
the wanderers' words. Without doing either they rose from their
seats and went away, thinking: "We shall come to understand
the meaning of these words in the Blessed One's presence."

5. When they had wandered for alms in SavatthI and had
returned from their almsround, after the meal they went to the
Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, they sat down at
one side and told him what had taken place. [The Blessed One
said:] [85]

6. "Bhikkhus, wanderers of other sects who speak thus should
be questioned thus: 'But, friends, what is the gratification, what


179


180 Mahadukkhakkhandha Sutta: Sutta 13


i 86


is the danger, and what is the escape in the case of sensual plea-
sures? What is the gratification, what is the danger, and what is
the escape in the case of material form? What is the gratification,
what is the danger, and what is the escape in the case of feel-
ings?' Being questioned thus, wanderers of other sects will fail
to account for the matter, and what is more, they will get into
difficulties. Why is that? Because it is not their province.
Bhikkhus, I see no one in the world with its gods, its Maras, and
its Brahmas, in this generation with its recluses and brahmins,
with its princes and its people, who could satisfy the mind with
a reply to these questions, except for the Tathagata or his disci-
ple or one who has learned it from them.

(sensual pleasures)

7. (i) "And what, bhikkhus, is the gratification in the case of sen-
sual pleasures? Bhikkhus, there are these five cords of sensual
pleasure. What are the five? Forms cognizable by the eye that
are wished for, desired, agreeable and likeable, connected with
sensual desire, and provocative of lust. Sounds cognizable by
the ear... Odours cognizable by the nose... Flavours cognizable
by the tongue. ..Tangibles cognizable by the body that are
wished for, desired, agreeable and likeable, connected with sen-
sual desire, and provocative of lust. These are the five cords of
sensual pleasure. Now the pleasure and joy that arise dependent
on these five cords of seqsual pleasure are the gratification in
the case of sensual pleasures.

8. (ii) "And what, bhikkhus, is the danger in the case of sensual
pleasures? Here, bhikkhus, on account of the craft by which a
clansman makes a living - whether checking or accounting or
calculating or farming or trading or husbandry or archery or the
royal service, or whatever craft it may be - he has to face cold, he
has to face heat, he is injured by contact with gadflies, mosqui-
toes, wind, sun, and creeping things; he risks death by hunger
and thirst. Now this is a danger in the case of sensual pleasures, a
mass of suffering visible here and now, having sensual pleasures
as its cause, sensual pleasures as its source, sensual pleasures as
its basis, [86] the cause being simply sensual pleasures.

9. "If no property comes to the clansman while he works and




i 87


The Greater Discourse on the Mass of Suffering 181


strives and makes an effort thus, he sorrows, grieves, and
laments, he weeps beating his breast and becomes distraught,
crying: "My work is in vain, my effort is fruitless!' Now this too
is a danger in the case of sensual pleasures... the cause being
simply sensual pleasures.

10. "If property comes to the clansman while he works and
strives and makes an effort thus, he experiences pain and grief
in protecting it: 'How shall neither kings nor thieves make off
with my property, nor fire burn it, nor water sweep it away, nor
hateful heirs make off with it?' And as he guards and protects
his property, kings or thieves make off with it, or fire burns it, or
water sweeps it away, or hateful heirs make off with it. And he
sorrows, grieves, and laments, he weeps beating his breast and
becomes distraught, crying: 'What I had I have no longer!' Now
this too is a danger in the case of sensual pleasures... the cause
being simply sensual pleasures.

11. "Again, with sensual pleasures as the cause, sensual plea-
sures as the source, sensual pleasures as the basis, the cause
being simply sensual pleasures, kings quarrel with kings, nobles
with nobles, brahmins with brahmins, householders with house-
holders; mother quarrels with child, child with mother, father
with child, child with father; brother quarrels with brother,
brother with sister, sister with brother, friend with friend. And
here in their quarrels, brawls, and disputes they attack each
other with fists, clods, sticks, or knives, whereby they incur
death or deadly suffering. Now this too is a danger in the case of
sensual pleasures... the cause being simply sensual pleasures.

12. "Again, with sensual pleasures as the cause... men take
swords and shields and buckle on bows and quivers, and they
charge into battle massed in double array with arrows and
spears flying and swords flashing; and there they are wounded
by arrows and spears, and their heads are cut off by swords,
whereby they incur death or deadly suffering. Now this too is a
danger in the case of sensual pleasures... the cause being simply
sensual pleasures.

13. "Again, with sensual pleasures as the cause... men take
swords and shields and buckle on bows and quivers, and they
charge slippery bastions, with arrows and spears flying [87]
and swords flashing; and there they are wounded by arrows


182 Mahadukkhakkhandha Sutta: Sutta 13


i 87


and spears and splashed with boiling liquids and crushed
under heavy weights, and their heads are cut off by swords,
whereby they incur death or deadly suffering. Now this too is a
danger in the case of sensual pleasures. . .the cause being simply
sensual pleasures.

14. "Again, with sensual pleasures as the cause... men break
into houses, plunder wealth, commit burglary, ambush high-
ways, seduce others' wives, and when they are caught, kings
have many kinds of torture inflicted on them. The kings have
them flogged with whips, beaten with canes, beaten with clubs;
they have their hands cut off, their feet cut off, their hands and
feet cut off; their ears cut off, their noses cut off, their ears and
noses cut off; they have them subjected to the 'porridge pot,' to
the 'polished-shell shave,' to the 'Rahu's mouth,' to the 'fiery
wreath,' to the 'flaming hand,' to the 'blades of grass,' to the 'bark
dress/ to the 'antelope,' to the 'meat hooks,' to the 'coins,' to the
'lye pickling,' to the 'pivoting pin,' to the 'rolled-up palliasse'; 201
and they have them splashed with boiling oil, and they have
them thrown to be devoured by dogs, and they have them
impaled alive on stakes, and they have their heads cut off with
swords - whereby they incur death or deadly suffering. Now
this too is a danger in the case of sensual pleasures... the cause
being simply sensual pleasures.

15. "Again, with sensual pleasures as the cause, sensual plea-
sures as the source, sensual pleasures as the basis, the cause
being simply sensual pleasures, people indulge in misconduct of
body, speech, and mind. Having done so, on the dissolution of
the body, after death, they reappear in states of deprivation, in
an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell. Now this too
is a danger in the case of sensual pleasures, a mass of suffering
in the life to come, 202 having sensual pleasures as its cause, sen-
sual pleasures as its source, sensual pleasures as its basis, the
cause being simply sensual pleasures.

16. (iii) "And what, bhikkhus, is the escape in the case of sen-
sual pleasures? It is the removal of desire and lust, the abandon-
ment of desire and lust for sensual pleasures. 203 This is the
escape in the case of sensual pleasures.

17. "That those recluses and brahmins who do not under-
stand as it actually is the gratification as gratification, the dan-
ger as danger, and the escape as escape in the case of sensual


i 88


The Greater Discourse on the Mass of Suffering 183


pleasures, can either themselves fully understand sensual plea-
sures or instruct another so that he can fully understand sensual
pleasures - that is impossible. That those recluses and brahmins
w ho understand as it actually is [88] the gratification as gratifi-
cation, the danger as danger, and the escape as escape in the
case of sensual pleasures, can either themselves fully under-
stand sensual pleasures or instruct another so that he can fully
understand sensual pleasures - that is possible.

(material form)

18. (i) "And what, bhikkhus, is the gratification in the case of
material form? Suppose there were a girl of the noble class or
the brahmin class or of householder stock, in her fifteenth or six-
teenth year, neither too tall nor too short, neither too thin nor
too fat, neither too dark nor too fair. Is her beauty and loveliness
then at its height?" - "Yes, venerable sir." - "Now the pleasure
and joy that arise in dependence on that beauty and loveliness
are the gratification in the case of material form.

19. (ii) "And what, bhikkhus, is the danger in the case of mate-
rial form? Later on one might see that same woman here at
eighty, ninety, or a hundred years, aged, as crooked as a roof
bracket, doubled up, supported by a walking stick, tottering,
frail, her youth gone, her teeth broken, grey-haired, scanty-
haired, bald, wrinkled, with limbs all blotchy. What do you
think, bhikkhus? Has her former beauty and loveliness vanished
and the danger become evident?" - "Yes, venerable sir." -
"Bhikkhus, this is a danger in the case of material form.

20. "Again, one might see that same woman afflicted, suffer-
ing, and gravely ill, lying fouled in her own excrement and
urine, lifted up by some and set down by others. What do you
think, bhikkhus? Has her former beauty and loveliness vanished
and the danger become evident?" - "Yes, venerable sir." -
"Bhikkhus, this too is a danger in the case of material form.

21. "Again, one might see that same woman as a corpse
thrown aside in a charnel ground, one, two, or three days dead,
bloated, livid, and oozing matter. What do you think, bhikkhus?
Has her former beauty and loveliness vanished and the danger
become evident?" - "Yes, venerable sir." - "Bhikkhus, this too is
a danger in the case of material form.


184 Mahadukkhakkhandha Sutta: Sutta 13


i 90


22-29. "Agai^ one might see that same woman as a corpse
thrown aside in a charnel ground, being devoured by crows,
hawks, vultures, dogs, jackals, or various kinds of worms...
[89]... a skeleton with flesh and blood, held together with
sinews... a fleshless skeleton smeared with blood, held together
with sinews. . .disconnected bones scattered in all directions - here
a hand-bone, there a foot-bone, here a thigh-bone, there a rib-
bone, here a hip-bone, there a back-bone, here the skull. . .bones
bleached white, the colour of shells... bones heaped up, more
than a year old... bones rotted and crumbled to dust. What do
you think, bhikkhus? Has her former beauty and loveliness van-
ished and the danger become evident?" - "Yes, venerable sir." -
"Bhikkhus, this too is a danger in the case of material form.

30. (iii) "And what, bhikkhus, is the escape in the case of mate-
rial form? It is the removal of desire and lust, the abandonment
of desire and lust for material form. This is the escape in the case
of material form.

31. "That those recluses and brahmins who do not under-
stand as it actually is the gratification as gratification, the dan-
ger as danger, and the escape as escape in the case of material
form, can either themselves fully understand material form or
instruct another so that he can fully understand material form -
that is impossible. That those recluses and brahmins who
understand as it actually is the gratification as gratification, the
danger as danger, and the escape as escape in the case of mater-
ial form, can either themselves fully understand material form
or instruct another so that he can fully understand material
form - that is possible.

(feelings)

32. (i) "And what, bhikkhus, is the gratification in the case of feel-
ings? Here, bhikkhus, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and
abides in the first jhana, which is accompanied by applied and sus-
tained thought, with rapture and pleasure bom of seclusion. 204 On
such an occasion he does not choose for his own affliction, or for
another's affliction, or for the affliction of both. [90] On that occa-
sion he feels only feeling that is free from affliction. The highest
gratification in the case of feelings is freedom from affliction, I say.



i 90


The Greater Discourse on the Mass of Suffering 185


33-35. "Again, with the stilling of applied and sustained
thought, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second
jhana...With the fading away as well of rapture. ..he enters upon
and abides in the third jhana...With the abandoning of pleasure
and pain he enters upon and abides in the fourth jhana...On
such an occasion he does not choose for his own affliction, or for
another's affliction, or for the affliction of both. On that occasion
he feels only feeling that is free from affliction. The highest grati-
fication in the case of feelings is freedom from affliction, I say.

36. (ii) "And what, bhikkhus, is the danger in the case of feel-
ings? Feelings are impermanent, suffering, and subject to
change. This is the danger in the case of feelings.

37. (iii) "And what, bhikkhus, is the escape in the case of
feelings? It is the removal of desire and lust, the abandonment
of desire and lust for feelings. This is the escape in the case of
feelings.

38. "That those recluses and brahmins who do not understand
as it actually is the gratification as gratification, the danger as
danger, and the escape as escape in the case of feelings, can
either themselves fully understand feelings or instruct another
so that he can fully understand feelings - that is impossible.
That those recluses and brahmins who understand as it actually
is the gratification as gratification, the danger as danger, and the
escape as escape in the case of feelings, can either themselves
fully understand feelings or instruct another so that he can fully
understand feelings - that is possible."

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


14 Culadukkhakkhandha Sutta
The Shorter Discourse
on the Mass of Suffering


[91] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was
living in the Sakyan country at Kapilavatthu in Nigrodha's Park.

2. Then Mahanama the Sakyan 205 went to the Blessed One, and
after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and said:
"Venerable sir, I have long understood the Dhamma taught by
the Blessed One thus: 'Greed is an imperfection that defiles the
mind, hate is an imperfection that defiles the mind, delusion is
an imperfection that defiles the mind.' Yet while I understand
the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One thus, at times states of
greed, hate, and delusion invade my mind and remain. I have
wondered, venerable sir, what state is still unabandoned by me
internally, owing to which at times these states of greed, hate,
and delusion invade my mind and remain." 206

3. "Mahanama, there is still a state unabandoned by you inter-
nally, owing to which at times states of greed, hate, and delu-
sion invade your mind and remain; for were that state already
abandoned by you internally you would not be living the home
life, you would not be enjoying sensual pleasures. 207 It is
because that state is unabandoned by you internally that you are
living the home life and enjoying sensual pleasures.

4. "Even though a noble disciple has seen clearly as it actually
is with proper wisdom how sensual pleasures provide little
gratification, much suffering, and much despair, and how great
is the danger in them, as long as he still does not attain to the
rapture and pleasure that are apart from sensual pleasures,
apart from unwholesome states, or to something more peaceful
than that, he may still be attracted to sensual pleasures. 208 But
when a noble disciple has seen clearly as it actually is with proper
wisdom how sensual pleasures provide little gratification, much


186


i 92


The Shorter Discourse on the Mass of Suffering 187


suffering, and much despair, and how great is the danger in
them, and he attains to the rapture and pleasure that are apart
from sensual pleasures, apart from unwholesome states, or to
something more peaceful than that, then he is no longer attract-
ed to sensual pleasures. [92]

5. "Before my enlightenment, while I was still only an un-
enlightened Bodhisatta, I too clearly saw as it actually is with
proper wisdom how sensual pleasures provide little gratifica-
tion, much suffering, and much despair, and how great is the
danger in them, but as long as I still did not attain to the rapture
and pleasure that are apart from sensual pleasures, apart from
unwholesome states, or to something more peaceful than that, I
recognised that I still could be attracted to sensual pleasures. But
when I clearly saw as it actually is with proper wisdom how
sensual pleasures provide little gratification, much suffering,
and much despair, and how great is the danger in them, and I
attained to the rapture and pleasure that are apart from sensual
pleasures, apart from unwholesome states, or to something
more peaceful than that, I recognised that I was no longer
attracted to sensual pleasures.

6-14. "And what is the gratification in the case of sensual
pleasures? Mahanama, there are these five cords of sensual
pleasure ... (as Sutta 13, §§7-15 )... Now this too is a danger in the
case of sensual pleasures, a mass of suffering in the life to come,
having sensual pleasures as its cause, sensual pleasures as its
source, sensual pleasures as its basis, the cause being simply
sensual pleasures.

15. "Now, Mahanama, on one occasion I was living at Raja-
gaha on the mountain Vulture Peak. On that occasion a number
of Niganthas living on the Black Rock on the slopes of Isigili were
practising continuous standing, rejecting seats, and were experi-
encing painful, racking, piercing feelings due to exertion. 209

16. "Then, when it was evening, I rose from meditation and
went to the Niganthas there. I asked them: 'Friends, why do you
practise continuous standing, rejecting seats, and experience
painful, racking, piercing feelings due to exertion?'

17. "When this was said, they replied: 'Friend, the Nigantha
Nataputta is omniscient and all-seeing and claims to have com-
plete knowledge and vision thus: "Whether I am walking or


I


188 Culadukkhakkhandha Sutta: Sutta 14 i 94

standing or asleep or awake, [93] knowledge and vision are con-
tinuously and uninterruptedly present to me." He says thus:
"Niganthas, you have done evil actions in the past; exhaust
them with the performance of piercing austerities. And when
you are here and now restrained in body, speech, and mind, that
is doing no evil actions for the future. So by annihilating with
asceticism past actions and by doing no fresh actions, there will
be no consequence in the future. With no consequence in the
future, there is the destruction of action. With the destruction of
action, there is the destruction of suffering. With the destruction
of suffering, there is the destruction of feeling. With the destruc-
tion of feeling, all suffering will be exhausted." This is [the doc-
trine] we approve of and accept, and we are satisfied with it.'

18. "When this was said, I told them: 'But, friends, do you
know that you existed in the past, and that it is not the case that
you did not exist?' - 'No, friend.' - 'But, friends, do you know
that you did evil actions in the past and did not abstain from
them?' - 'No, friend.' - 'But, friends, do you know that you did
such and such evil actions?' - 'No, friend.' - 'But, friends, do
you know that so much suffering has already been exhausted, or
that so much suffering has still to be exhausted, or that when so
much suffering has been exhausted all suffering will have been
exhausted?' - 'No, friend.' - 'But, friends, do you know what the
abandoning of unwholesome states is and what the cultivation
of wholesome states is here and now?' - 'No, friend.'

19. "'So, friends, it seems that you do not know that you exist-
ed in the past and that it iJ not the case that you did not exist; or
that you did evil actions in the past and did not abstain from
them; or that you did such and such evil actions; or that so
much suffering has already been exhausted, or that so much suf-
fering has still to be exhausted, or that when so much suffering
has been exhausted all suffering will have been exhausted; or
what the abandoning of unwholesome states is and what the
cultivation of wholesome states is here and now. That being so,
those who are murderers, bloody-handed evil-doers in the
world, when they are reborn among human beings, go forth into
homelessness as Niganthas.' 210

20. "'Friend Gotama, pleasure is not to be gained through
pleasure; pleasure is to be gained through pain. [94] For were
pleasure to be gained through pleasure, then King Seniya


i 95


The Shorter Discourse on the Mass of Suffering 189


Bimbisara of Magadha would gain pleasure, since he abides in
greater pleasure than the venerable Gotama.'

'"Surely the venerable Niganthas have uttered those words
rashly and without reflection. Rather it is I who ought to be
asked: "Who abides in greater pleasure. King Seniya Bimbisara
of Magadha or the venerable Gotama?"'

'"Surely, friend Gotama, we uttered those words rashly and
without reflection. But let that be. Now we ask the venerable
Gotama: Who abides in greater pleasure. King Seniya Bimbisara
of Magadha or the venerable Gotama?'

21. "'Then, friends, I shall ask you a question in return.
Answer it as you like. What do you think, friends? Can King
Seniya Bimbisara of Magadha abide without moving his body or
uttering a word, experiencing the peak of pleasure for seven
days and nights?' - 'No, friend.' - 'Can King Seniya Bimbisara
of Magadha abide without moving his body or uttering a word,
experiencing the peak of pleasure for six, five, four, three, or two
days and nights?. . .for one day and night?' - 'No, friend.'

22. "'But, friends, I can abide without moving my body or
uttering a word, experiencing the peak of pleasure for one day
and night. . .for two, three, four, five, and six days and nights. . .for
seven days and nights. 211 What do you think, friends? That
being so, who dwells in greater pleasure. King Seniya Bimbisara
of Magadha or I?'

"'That being so, [95] the venerable Gotama abides in greater
pleasure than King Seniya Bimbisara of Magadha.'"

That is what the Blessed One said. Mahanama the Sakyan was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.



15 Anumana Sutta
Inference


1 . Thus have I heard. On one occasion the venerable Maha
Moggallana was living in the Bhagga country at Sumsumaragira
in the Bhesakala Grove, the Deer Park. There he addressed the
bhikkhus thus: "Friends, bhikkhus." - "Friend," they replied.
The venerable Maha Moggallana said this:

2. "Friends, though a bhikkhu asks thus: 'Let the venerable
ones admonish me, 212 1 need to be admonished by the venerable
ones,' yet if he is difficult to admonish and possesses qualities
that make him difficult to admonish, if he is impatient and does
not take instruction rightly, then his companions in the holy life
think that he should not be admonished or instructed, they
think of him as a person not to be trusted.

3. "What qualities make him difficult to admonish?

(1) Here a bhikkhu has evil wishes and is dominated by evil
wishes; 213 this is a quality that makes him difficult to admonish.

(2) Again, a bhikkhu lauds himself and disparages others; this
is a quality that makes him’ difficult to admonish.

(3) Again, a bhikkhu is angry and is overcome by anger; this is
a quality. . .

(4) Again, a bhikkhu is angry, and revengeful because of
anger. . .

(5) Again, a bhikkhu is angry, and stubborn because of
anger...

(6) Again, a bhikkhu is angry, and he utters words bordering
on anger...

(7) Again, a bhikkhu is reproved, and he resists the reprover...

(8) Again, a bhikkhu is reproved, and he denigrates the
reprover. . .

(9) Again, [96] a bhikkhu is reproved, and he counter-reproves
the reprover. . .

190


0


i 97


Inference 191


(10) Again, a bhikkhu is reproved, and he prevaricates, leads
the talk aside, and shows anger, hate, and bitterness. . .

(11) Again, a bhikkhu is reproved, and he fails to account for
his conduct. . .

(12) Again, a bhikkhu is contemptuous and domineering. ..

(13) Again, a bhikkhu is envious and avaricious. . .

(14) Again, a bhikkhu is fraudulent and deceitful. . .

(15) Again, a bhikkhu is obstinate and arrogant. . .

(16) Again, a bhikkhu adheres to his own views, holds on to
them tenaciously, and relinquishes them with difficulty; this is a
quality that makes him difficult to admonish. 214

"Friends, these are called the qualities that make him difficult
to admonish.

4. "Friends, though a bhikkhu does not ask thus: 'Let the ven-
erable ones admonish me; I need to be admonished by the vener-
able ones,' yet if he is easy to admonish and possesses qualities
that make him easy to admonish, if he is patient and takes
instruction rightly, then his companions in the holy life think
that he should be admonished and instructed, and they think of
him as a person to be trusted.

5. "What qualities make him easy to admonish?

(1) Here a bhikkhu has no evil wishes and is not dominated by
evil wishes; this is a quality that makes him easy to admonish.

(2) Again, a bhikkhu does not laud himself nor disparage others;
this is a quality...

(3) He is not angry nor allows anger to overcome him. . .

(4) He is not angry or revengeful because of anger. . .

(5) He is not angry or stubborn because of anger. . .

(6) He is not angry, and he does not utter words bordering
on anger...

(7) He is reproved, and he does not resist the reprover. . .

(8) He is reproved, and he does not denigrate the reprover. . . [97]

(9) He is reproved, and he does not counter-reprove the
reprover...

(10) He is reproved, and he does not prevaricate, lead the talk
aside, and show anger, hate, and bitterness...

(11) He is reproved, and he does not fail to account for his
conduct. . .

(12) He is not contemptuous or domineering. . .

(13) He is not envious or avaricious. . .


192 Anumana Sutta: Sutta 15


ilOO


(14) He is not fraudulent or deceitful. . .

(15) He is not obstinate or arrogant. . .

(16) Again, a bhikkhu does not adhere to his own views or
hold on to them tenaciously, and he relinquishes them easily;
this is a quality that makes him easy to admonish.

"Friends, these are called the qualities that make him easy to
admonish.

6. "Now, friends, a bhikkhu ought to infer about himself in the
following way: 215

(1) 'A person with evil wishes and dominated by evil wishes is
displeasing and disagreeable to me. If I were to have evil wishes
and be dominated by evil wishes, I would be displeasing and
disagreeable to others.' A bhikkhu who knows this should
arouse his mind thus: 'I shall not have evil wishes and be domi-
nated by evil wishes.'

(2-16) 'A person who lauds himself and disparages others...
[98 ]...A person who adheres to his own views, holds on to
them tenaciously, and relinquishes them with difficulty is dis-
pleasing and disagreeable to me. If I were to adhere to my own
views, hold on to them tenaciously, and relinquish them with
difficulty, I would be displeasing and disagreeable to others.' A
bhikkhu who knows this should arouse his mind thus: 'I shall
not adhere to my own views, hold on to them tenaciously, and I
shall relinquish them easily.'

7. "Now, friends, a bhikkhu should review himself thus:

(1) 'Do I have evil wishes- and am I dominated by evil wishes?'
If, when he reviews himself, he knows: 'I have evil wishes, I am
dominated by evil wishes,' then he should make an effort to
abandon those evil unwholesome states. But if, when he reviews
himself, he knows: 'I have no evil wishes, I am not dominated
by evil wishes,' then he can abide happy and glad, training day
and night in wholesome states.

(2-16) Again, a bhikkhu should review himself thus: 'Do I
praise myself and disparage others?'... [99]... 'Do I adhere to my
own views, hold on to them tenaciously, and relinquish them
with difficulty?' If, when he reviews himself, he knows: 'I
adhere to my own views...,' then [100] he should make an effort
to abandon those evil unwholesome states. But if, when he
reviews himself, he knows: 'I do not adhere to my own


ilOO


Inference 193


views.../ then he can abide happy and glad, training day and
night in wholesome states.

8. "Friends, when a bhikkhu reviews himself thus, if he sees
that these evil unwholesome states are not all abandoned in
himself, then he should make an effort to abandon them all. But
if, when he reviews himself thus, he sees that they are all aban-
doned in himself, then he can abide happy and glad, training
day and night in wholesome states. 216

"Just as when a woman - or a man - young, youthful, fond of
ornaments, on viewing the image of her own face in a clear
bright mirror or in a basin of clear water, sees a smudge or a
blemish on it, she makes an effort to remove it, but if she sees no
smudge or blemish on it, she becomes glad thus: 'It is a gain for
me that it is clean'; so too when a bhikkhu reviews himself
thus... then he can abide happy and glad, training day and night
in wholesome states."

That is what the venerable Maha Moggallana said. The
bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the venerable Maha
Moggallana's words.


l






1



16 Cetokhila Sutta
The Wilderness in the Heart


[101] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One
was living at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." -
"Venerable sir," they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, that any bhikkhu who has not abandoned five
wildernesses in the heart and not severed five shackles in the
heart should come to growth, increase, and fulfilment in this
Dharruna and Discipline - that is impossible. 217

3. "What, bhikkhus, are the five wildernesses in the heart that
he has not abandoned? Here a bhikkhu is doubtful, uncertain,
undecided, and unconfident about the Teacher, and thus his
mind does not incline to ardour, devotion, perseverance, and
striving. As his mind does not incline to ardour, devotion, perse-
verance, and striving, that is the first wilderness in the heart that
he has not abandoned.

4. "Again, a bhikkhu is doubtful, uncertain, undecided, and
unconfident about the Dhamma 218 ...As his mind does not
incline to ardour... that is the second wilderness in the heart that
he has not abandoned.

5. "Again, a bhikkhu is doubtful, uncertain, undecided, and
unconfident about the Sangha...As his mind does not incline to
ardour. . .that is the third wilderness in the heart that he has not
abandoned.

6. "Again, a bhikkhu is doubtful, uncertain, undecided, and
unconfident about the training... As his mind does not incline to
ardour. . .that is the fourth wilderness in the heart that he has not
abandoned.

7. "Again, a bhikkhu is angry and displeased with his com-
panions in the holy life, resentful and callous towards them, and
thus his mind does not incline to ardour, devotion, perseverance.


194


The Wilderness in the Heart 195


i 102

and striving. As his mind does not incline to ardour, devotion,
perseverance, and striving, that is the fifth wilderness in the
heart that he has not abandoned.

"These are the five wildernesses in the heart that he has not
abandoned.

8. "What, bhikkhus, are the five shackles in the heart that he
has not severed? Here a bhikkhu is not free from lust, desire,
affection, thirst, fever, and craving for sensual pleasures, and
thus his mind does not incline to ardour, devotion, persever-
ance, and striving. As his mind does not incline to ardour, devo-
tion, perseverance, and striving, that is the first shackle in the
heart that he has not severed.

9. "Again, a bhikkhu is not free from lust, desire, affection,
thirst, fever, and craving for the body 219 ... As his mind does not
incline to ardour... that is the second shackle in the heart that he
has not severed. [102]

10. "Again, a bhikkhu is not free from lust, desire, affection,
thirst, fever, and craving for form... As his mind does not incline
to ardour... that is the third shackle in the heart that he has not
severed.

11. "Again, a bhikkhu eats as much as he likes until his belly is
full and indulges in the pleasures of sleeping, lolling, and
drowsing... As his mind does not incline to ardour... that is the
fourth shackle in the heart that he has not severed.

12. "Again, a bhikkhu lives the holy life aspiring to some
order of gods thus: 'By this virtue or observance or asceticism or
holy life, I shall become a [great] god or some [lesser] god,' and
thus his mind does not incline to ardour, devotion, persever-
ance, and striving. As his mind does not incline to ardour, devo-
tion, perseverance, and striving, this is the fifth shackle in the
heart that he has not severed.

"These are the five shackles in the heart that he has not severed.

13. "Bhikkhus, that any bhikkhu who has not abandoned
these five wildernesses in the heart and severed these five
shackles in the heart should come to growth, increase, and fulfil-
ment in this Dhamma and Discipline - that is impossible.

14. "Bhikkhus, that any bhikkhu who has abandoned five
wildernesses in the heart and severed five shackles in the heart
should come to growth, increase, and fulfilment in this Dhamma
and Discipline - that is possible.


196 Cetokhila Sutta: Sutta 16


i 103


15. "What, bhikkhus, are the five wildernesses in the heart that
he has abandoned? Here a bhikkhu is not doubtful, uncertain,
undecided, or unconfident about the Teacher, and thus his mind
inclines to ardour, devotion, perseverance, and striving. As his
mind inclines to ardour, devotion, perseverance, and striving,
the first wilderness in the heart has been abandoned by him.

16. "Again, a bhikkhu is not doubtful, uncertain, undecided,
or unconfident about the Dhamma...As his mind inclines to
ardour... the second wilderness in the heart has been aban-
doned by him.

17. "Again, a bhikkhu is not doubtful, uncertain, undecided,
or unconfident about the Sangha...As his mind inclines to
ardour... the third wilderness in the heart has been aban-
doned by him.

18. "Again, a bhikkhu is not doubtful, uncertain, undecided,
or unconfident about the training... As his mind inclines to
ardour... the fourth wilderness in the heart has been aban-
doned by him.

19. "Again, a bhikkhu is not angry and displeased with his
companions in the holy life, nor resentful and callous towards
them, and thus his mind inclines to ardour, devotion, persever-
ance, and striving. [103] As his mind inclines to ardour, devo-
tion, perseverance, and striving, the fifth wilderness in the heart
has been abandoned by him.

"These are the five wildernesses in the heart that he has
abandoned.

20. "What, bhikkhus, are the five shackles in the heart that he
has severed? Here a bhikkhu is free from lust, desire, affection,
thirst, fever, and craving for sensual pleasures, and thus his
mind inclines to ardour, devotion, perseverance, and striving.
As his mind inclines to ardour, devotion, perseverance, and
striving, the first shackle in the heart has been severed by him.

21. "Again, a bhikkhu is free from lust, desire, affection, thirst,
fever, and craving for the body. ..As his mind inclines to
ardour. . .the second shackle in the heart has been severed by him.

22. "Again, a bhikkhu is free from lust, desire, affect ion, thirst,
fever, and craving for form. . .As his mind inclines to ardour. . .the
third shackle in the heart has been severed by him.

23. "Again, a bhikkhu does not eat as much as he likes until
his belly is full and does not indulge in the pleasures of sleeping.



i 104


The Wilderness in the Heart 197


lolling, and drowsing... As his mind inclines to ardour... the
fourth shackle in the heart has been severed by him.

24. "Again, a bhikkhu does not live the holy life aspiring to
some order of gods thus: 'By this virtue or observance or
asceticism or holy life, I shall become a [great] god or some
[lesser] god/ and thus his mind inclines to ardour, devotion,
perseverance, and striving. As his mind inclines to ardour,
devotion, perseverance, and striving, the fifth shackle in the
heart has been severed by him.

"These are the five shackles in the heart that he has severed.

25. "Bhikkhus, that any bhikkhu who has abandoned these
five wildernesses in the heart and severed these five shackles in
the heart should come to growth, increase, and fulfilment in this
Dhamma and Discipline - that is possible.

26. "He develops the basis for spiritual power consisting in
concentration due to zeal and determined striving; he develops
the basis for spiritual power consisting in concentration due to
energy and determined striving; he develops the basis for spiri-
tual power consisting in concentration due to [purity of] mind
and determined striving; he develops the basis for spiritual
power consisting in concentration due to investigation and
determined striving. And enthusiasm is the fifth. 220

27. "A bhikkhu who thus possesses the fifteen factors including
enthusiasm is [104] capable of breaking out, capable of enlighten-
ment, capable of attaining the supreme security from bondage. 221

"Suppose there were a hen with eight, ten, or twelve eggs,
which she had covered, incubated, and nurtured properly. Even
though she did not wish: 'Oh, that my chicks might pierce their
shells with the points of their claws and beaks and hatch out
safely!' yet the chicks are capable of piercing their shells with
the points of their claws and beaks and hatching out safely. 222 So
too, a bhikkhu who thus possesses the fifteen factors including
enthusiasm is capable of breaking out, capable of enlighten-
ment, capable of attaining the supreme security from bondage."

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


17 Vanapattha Sutta
Jungle Thickets


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There he
addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, I shall teach you a discourse on jungle thickets.
Listen and attend closely to what I shall say." - "Yes, venerable
sir," the bhikkhus replied. The Blessed One said this:

3. "Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu lives in some jungle thicket. 223
While he is living there his unestablished mindfulness does not
become established, his unconcentrated mind does not become
concentrated, his undestroyed taints do not come to destruction,
he does not attain the unattained supreme security from
bondage; and also the requisites of life that should be obtained
by one gone forth - robes, almsfood, resting place, and medici-
nal requisites - are hard to come by. The bhikkhu [105] should
consider thus: 'I am living in this jungle thicket. While I am liv-
ing here my unestablished imindfulness does not become estab-
lished...! do not attain the unattained supreme security from
bondage; and also the requisites of life... are hard to come by.'
That bhikkhu should depart from that jungle thicket that very
night or that very day; he should not continue living there.

4. "Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu lives in some jungle thicket.
While he is living there Iris unestablished mindfulness does not
become established, his unconcentrated mind does not become
concentrated, his undestroyed taints do not come to destruction,
he does not attain the unattained supreme security from
bondage; yet the requisites of life that should be obtained by one
gone forth... are easy to come by. The bhikkhu should consider
thus: 'I am living in this jungle thicket. While I am living here my
unestablished mindfulness does not become established...! do


198


Jungle Thickets 199


1106

not attain the unattained supreme security from bondage; yet the
requisites of life that should be obtained by one gone forth... are
easy to come by. However, I did not go forth from the home life
into homelessness for the sake of robes, almsfood, resting place,
and medicinal requisites. Moreover, while I am living here my
unestablished mindfulness does not become established... I do
not attain the unattained supreme security from bondage.'
Having reflected thus, that bhikkhu should depart from that jun-
gle thicket; he should not continue living there.

5. "Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu lives in some jungle thicket.
While he is living there his unestablished mindfulness becomes
established, his unconcentrated mind becomes concentrated, his
undestroyed taints come to destruction, he attains the unat-
tained supreme security from bondage; yet the requisites of life
that should be obtained by one gone forth. . .are hard to come by.
The bhikkhu should consider thus: [106] 'I am living in this jun-
gle thicket. While I am living here my unestablished mindful-
ness has become established... I have attained the unattained
supreme security from bondage; yet the requisites of life... are
hard to come by. However, I did not go forth from the home life
into homelessness for the sake of robes, almsfood, resting place,
and medicinal requisites. Moreover, while I am living here my
unestablished mindfulness has become established... I have
attained the unattained supreme security from bondage.'
Having reflected thus, that bhikkhu should continue living in
that jungle thicket; he should not depart.

6. "Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu lives in some jungle thicket.
While he is living there his unestablished mindfulness
becomes established, his unconcentrated mind becomes con-
centrated, his undestroyed taints come to destruction, he
attains the unattained supreme security from bondage; and
also the requisites of life that should be obtained by one gone
forth - robes, almsfood, resting place, and medicinal requisites
- are easy to come by. The bhikkhu should consider thus: 'I am
living in this jungle thicket. While I am living here my unestab-
lished mindfulness has become established... I have attained
the unattained supreme security from bondage; and also the
requisites of life... are easy to come by.' That bhikkhu should
continue living in that jungle thicket as long as life lasts; he
should not depart.


200 Vanapattha Sutta : Sutta 17


i 108


7-10. "Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu lives in dependence upon a
certain village . . , 224

11-14. "Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu lives in dependence upon a
certain town. . .

15-18. "Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu lives in dependence upon a
certain city...

19-22. "Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu lives in dependence upon a
certain country...

23. "Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu lives in dependence upon a
certain person.. .(as in §3) [107]. ..That bhikkhu should depart
from that person without taking leave; he should not continue
following him.

24. "Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu lives in dependence upon a
certain person... (as in §4 )... Having reflected thus, that bhikkhu
should depart from that person after taking leave; 225 he should
not continue following him.

25. "Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu lives in dependence upon a
certain person ... (as in §5)... Having reflected thus, that bhikkhu
should continue following that person; he should not depart
from him.

26. "Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu lives in dependence upon a
certain person... (as in §6) [108]... That bhikkhu should continue
following that person as long as life lasts; he should not depart
from him even if told to go away."

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.



18 Madhupindika Sutta
The Honeyball


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing in the Sakyan country at Kapilavatthu in Nigrodha's Park.

2. Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One dressed, and
taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Kapilavatthu for alms.
When he had wandered for alms in Kapilavatthu and had
returned from his almsround, after his meal he went to the
Great Wood for the day's abiding, and entering the Great Wood,
sat down at the root of a bilva sapling for the day's abiding.

3. Dandapani the Sakyan, while walking and wandering for
exercise, also went to the Great Wood, and when he had entered
the Great Wood, he went to the bilva sapling where the Blessed
One was and exchanged greetings with him. When this courte-
ous and amiable talk was finished, he stood at one side leaning
on his stick and asked the Blessed One: "What does the recluse
assert, what does he proclaim?" 226

4. "Friend, I assert and proclaim such [a teaching] that one
does not quarrel with anyone in the world with its gods, its
Maras, and its Brahmas, in this generation with its recluses and
brahmins, its princes and its people; such [a teaching] that per-
ceptions no more underlie that brahmin who abides detached
from sensual pleasures, without perplexity, shorn of worry, free
from craving for any kind of being." 227

5. When this was said, Dandapani the Sakyan shook his head,
[109] wagged his tongue, and raised his eyebrows until his fore-
head was puckered in three lines. 228 Then he departed, leaning
on his stick.

6. Then, when it was evening, the Blessed One rose from med-
itation and went to Nigrodha's Park, where he sat down on a
seat made ready for him and told the bhikkhus what had taken
place. Then a certain bhikkhu asked the Blessed One:


201


202 Madhupindika Sutta: Sutta 18


i 111


7. "But, venerable sir, what is [the teaching] that the Blessed
One asserts whereby one does not quarrel with anyone in the
world with its gods, its Maras, and its Brahmas, in this genera-
tion with its recluses and brahmins, its princes and its people?
And, venerable sir, how is it that perceptions no more underlie
that brahmin who abides detached from sensual pleasures,
without perplexity, shorn of worry, free from craving for any
kind of being?"

8. "Bhikkhus, as to the source through which perceptions and
notions tinged by mental proliferation beset a man: if nothing is
found there to delight in, welcome and hold to, this is the end of
the underlying tendency to lust, of the underlying tendency to
aversion, [110] of the underlying tendency to views, of the
underlying tendency to doubt, of the underlying tendency to
conceit, of the underlying tendency to desire for being, of the
underlying tendency to ignorance; this is the end of resorting to
rods and weapons, of quarrels, brawls, disputes, recrimination,
malice, and false speech; here these evil unwholesome states
cease without remainder." 229

9. That is what the Blessed One said. Having said this, the
Sublime One rose from his seat and went into his dwelling.

10. Then, soon after the Blessed One had gone, the bhikkhus
considered: "Now, friends, the Blessed One has risen from his
seat and gone into his dwelling after giving a summary in brief
without expounding the detailed meaning. Now who will
expound this in detail?" Then they considered: "The venerable
Maha Kaccana is praised by the Teacher and esteemed by his
wise companions in the holy life. 230 He is capable of expounding
the detailed meaning. Suppose we went to him and asked him
the meaning of this."

11. Then the bhikkhus went to the venerable Maha Kaccana
and exchanged greetings with him. When this courteous and
amiable talk was finished, they sat down to one side and told
him what had taken place, [111] adding: "Let the venerable
Maha Kaccana expound it to us."

12. [The venerable Maha Kaccana replied:] "Friends, it is as
though a man needing heartwood, seeking heartwood, wander-
ing in search of heartwood, thought that heartwood should be
sought for among the branches and leaves of a great tree stand-
ing possessed of heartwood, after he had passed over the root


The Honeyball 203


i 112

and the trunk. And so it is with you, venerable sirs, that you
think that I should be asked about the meaning of this, after you
passed the Blessed One by when you were face to face with the
Teacher. For knowing, the Blessed One knows; seeing, he sees;
he is vision, he is knowledge, he is the Dhamma, he is the holy
one; 231 he is the sayer, the proclaimer, the elucidator of meaning,
the giver of the Deathless, the lord of the Dhamma, the
Tathagata. That was the time when you should have asked the
Blessed One the meaning. As he told you, so you should have
remembered it."

13. "Surely, friend Kaccana, knowing, the Blessed One knows;
seeing, he sees; he is vision... the Tathagata. That was the time
when we should have asked the Blessed One the meaning. As
he told us, so we should have remembered it. Yet the venerable
Maha Kaccana is praised by the Teacher and esteemed by his
wise companions in the holy life. The venerable Maha Kaccana
is capable of expounding the detailed meaning of this summary
given in brief by the Blessed One without expounding the
detailed meaning. Let the venerable Maha Kaccana expound it
without finding it troublesome."

14. “Then listen, friends, and attend closely to what I shall
say." - "Yes, friend," the bhikkhus replied. The venerable Maha
Kaccana said this:

15. "Friends, when the Blessed One rose from his seat and
went into his dwelling after giving a summary in brief without
expounding the detailed meaning, that is: 'Bhikkhus, as to the
source through which perceptions and notions tinged by mental
proliferation beset a man: if nothing is found there to delight in,
welcome, and hold to, this is the end of the underlying tendency
to lust... this is the end of resorting to rods and weapons... here
these evil unwholesome states cease without remainder/ I
understand the detailed meaning of it to be as follows:

16. "Dependent on the eye and forms, eye-consciousness arises.
The meeting of the three is contact. With contact as condition
there is feeling. What one feels, that one perceives. [112] What
one perceives, that one thinks about. What one thinks about,
that one mentally proliferates. With what one has mentally pro-
liferated as the source, perceptions and notions tinged by mental
proliferation beset a man with respect to past, future, and pre-
sent forms cognizable through the eye. 232


204 Madhupindika Sutta: Sutta 18


i 112


j "Dependent on the ear and sounds.. .Dependent on the nose

| and odours... Dependent on the tongue and flavours... Dependent

on the body and tangibles... Dependent on the mind and mind-
objects, mind-consciousness arises. The meeting of the three is
contact. With contact as condition there is feeling. What one
feels, that one perceives. What one perceives, that one thinks
about. What one thinks about, that one mentally proliferates.
With what one has mentally proliferated as the source, percep-
tions and notions tinged by mental proliferation beset a man
with respect to past, future, and present mind-objects cognizable
through the mind.

17. "When there is the eye, a form, and eye-consciousness, it is
possible to point out the manifestation of contact. 233 When there
is the manifestation of contact, it is possible to point out the man-
ifestation of feeling. When there is the manifestation of feeling, it
is possible to point out the manifestation of perception. When
there is the manifestation of perception, it is possible to point out
the manifestation of thinking. When there is the manifestation of
thinking, it is possible to point out the manifestation of being
beset by perceptions and notions tinged by mental proliferation.

"When there is the ear, a sound, and ear-consciousness... When
there is the nose, an odour, and nose-consciousness. . .When there
is the tongue, a flavour, and tongue-consciousness... When there
is the body, a tangible, and body-consciousness... When there is
the mind, a mind-object, and mind-consciousness... it is possible
to point out the manifestation of being beset by perceptions and
notions tinged by mental proliferation.

18. "When there is no eye, no form, and no eye-consciousness,
it is impossible to point out the manifestation of contact. When
there is no manifestation of contact, it is impossible to point out
the manifestation of feeling. When there is no manifestation of
feeling, it is impossible to point out the manifestation of percep-
tion. When there is no manifestation of perception, it is impossi-
ble to point out the manifestation of thinking. When there is no
manifestation of thinking, it is impossible to point out the mani-
festation of being beset by perceptions and notions tinged by
mental proliferation.

"When there is no ear, no sound, and no ear-consciousness...
When there is no nose, no odour, and no nose-consciousness...


The Honeyball 205


i 114

\Vhen there is no tongue, no flavour, and no tongue-
consciousness-.-When there is no body, no tangible, and no
body-consciousness... When there is no mind, no mind-object,
and no mind-consciousness... it is impossible to point out the
manifestation of being beset by perceptions and notions tinged
by mental proliferation.

19. "Friends, when the Blessed One [113] rose from his seat
and went into his dwelling after giving a summary in brief with-
out expounding the detailed meaning, that is: 'Bhikkhus, as to
the source through which perceptions and notions tinged by
mental proliferation beset a man: if nothing is found there to
delight in, welcome, and hold to, this is the end of the underly-
ing tendency to lust, of the underlying tendency to aversion, of
the underlying tendency to views, of the underlying tendency to
doubt, of the underlying tendency to conceit, of the underlying
tendency to desire for being, of the underlying tendency to igno-
rance; this is the end of resorting to rods and weapons, of quar-
rels, brawls, disputes, recrimination, malice, and false speech;
here these evil unwholesome states cease without remainder,' I
understand the detailed meaning of this summary to be thus.
Now, friends, if you wish, go to the Blessed One and ask him
about the meaning of this. As the Blessed One explains it to you,
so you should remember it."

20. Then the bhikkhus, having delighted and rejoiced in the
venerable Maha Kaccana's words, rose from their seats and
went to the Blessed One. After paying homage to him, they sat
down at one side and told the Blessed One all that had taken
place after he had left, adding: "Then, venerable sir, we went to
the venerable Maha Kaccana and asked him about the meaning.
[114] The venerable Maha Kaccana expounded the meaning to
us with these terms, statements, and phrases."

21. "Maha Kaccana is wise, bhikkhus, Maha Kaccana has great
wisdom. If you had asked me the meaning of this, I would have
explained it to you in the same way that Maha Kaccana has
explained it. Such is the meaning of this, and so you should
remember it."

22. When this was said, the venerable Ananda said to the
Blessed One: "Venerable sir, just as if a man exhausted by
hunger and weakness came upon a honeyball, 234 in the course of




206 Madhupindika Sutta: Sutta 18


i 114


| eating it he would find a sweet delectable flavour; so too, vener-

I able sir, any able-minded bhikkhu, in the course of scrutinising

I with wisdom the meaning of this discourse on the Dhamma,

J would find satisfaction and confidence of mind. Venerable sir,

f what is the name of this discourse on the Dhamma?"

i "As to that, Ananda, you may remember this discourse on the

! Dhamma as "The Honeyball Discourse.'"

I That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Ananda was

satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


19 Dvedhavitakka Sutta
Two Kinds of Thought


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There he
addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, before my enlightenment, while I was still only
an unenlightened Bodhisatta, it occurred to me: 'Suppose that I
divide my thoughts into two classes.' 235 Then I set on one side
thoughts of sensual desire, thoughts of ill will, and thoughts of
cruelty, and I set on the other side thoughts of renunciation,
thoughts of non-ill will, and thoughts of non-cruelty. 236

3. "As I abided thus, diligent, ardent, and resolute, [115] a
thought of sensual desire arose in me. I understood thus: 'This
thought of sensual desire has arisen in me. This leads to my own
affliction, to others' affliction, and to the affliction of both; it
obstructs wisdom, causes difficulties, and leads away from
Nibbana.' When I considered: 'This leads to my own affliction,'
it subsided in me; when I considered: 'This leads to others'
affliction,' it subsided in me; when I considered: 'This leads to
the affliction of both,' it subsided in me; when I considered:
'This obstructs wisdom, causes difficulties, and leads away from
Nibbana,' it subsided in me. Whenever a thought of sensual
desire arose in me, I abandoned it, removed it, did away with it.

4-5. "As I abided thus, diligent, ardent, and resolute, a
thought of ill will arose in me. . .a thought of cruelty arose in me.
I understood thus: 'This thought of cruelty has arisen in me.
This leads to my own affliction, to others' affliction, and to the
affliction of both; it obstructs wisdom, causes difficulties, and
leads away from Nibbana.' When I considered thus. . .it subsided
in me. Whenever a thought of cruelty arose in me, I abandoned
it, removed it, did away with it.


207


208 Dvedhavitakka Sutta: Sutta 19


i 116


6. "Bhikkhus, whatever a bhikkhu frequently thinks and pon-
ders upon, that will become the inclination of his mind. If he fre-
quently thinks and ponders upon thoughts of sensual desire, he
has abandoned the thought of renunciation to cultivate the
thought of sensual desire, and then his mind inclines to
thoughts of sensual desire. If he frequently thinks and ponders
upon thoughts of ill will... upon thoughts of cruelty, he has
abandoned the thought of non-cruelty to cultivate the thought
of cruelty, and then his mind inclines to thoughts of cruelty.

7. "Just as in the last month of the rainy season, in the autumn,
when the crops thicken, a cowherd would guard his cows by
constantly tapping and poking them on this side and that with a
stick to check and curb them. Why is that? Because he sees that
he could be flogged, imprisoned, fined, or blamed [if he let them
stray into the crops]. So too I saw in unwholesome states dan-
ger, degradation, and defilement, and in wholesome states the
blessing of renunciation, the aspect of cleansing. [116]

8. "As I abided thus, diligent, ardent, and resolute, a thought
of renunciation arose in me. I understood thus: 'This thought of
renunciation has arisen in me. This does not lead to my own
affliction, or to others' affliction, or to the affliction of both; it
aids wisdom, does not cause difficulties, and leads to Nibbana.
If I think and ponder upon this thought even for a night, even
for a day, even for a night and day, I see nothing to fear from it.
But with excessive thinking and pondering I might tire my
body, and when the body is tired, the mind becomes disturbed,
and when the mind is disturbed, it is far from concentration.' So
I steadied my mind internally, quieted it, brought it to single-
ness, and concentrated it. Why is that? So that my mind should
not be disturbed. 237

9-10. "As I abided thus, diligent, ardent, and resolute, a
thought of non-ill will arose in me... a thought of non-cruelty
arose in me. I understood thus: 'This thought of non-cruelty has
arisen in me. This does not lead to my own affliction, or to oth-
ers' affliction, or to the affliction of both; it aids wisdom, does
not cause difficulties, and leads to Nibbana. If I think and pon-
der upon this thought even for a night, even for a day, even for
a night and day, I see nothing to fear from it. But with excessive
thinking and pondering I might tire my body, and when the
body is tired, the mind becomes disturbed, and when the mind


Two Kinds of Thought 209


ill 7

is disturbed, it is far from concentration.' So I steadied my mind
internally, quieted it, brought it to singleness, and concentrated
it. Why is that? So that my mind should not be disturbed.

11. "Bhikkhus, whatever a bhikkhu frequently thinks and pon-
ders upon, that will become the inclination of his mind. If he fre-
quently thinks and ponders upon thoughts of renunciation, he
has abandoned the thought of sensual desire to cultivate the
thought of renunciation, and then his mind inclines to thoughts
of renunciation. If he frequently thinks and ponders upon
thoughts of non-ill will... upon thoughts of non-cruelty, he has
abandoned the thought of cruelty to cultivate the thought of non-
cruelty, and then his mind inclines to thoughts of non-cruelty.

12. "Just as in the last month of the hot season, when all the
crops have been brought inside the villages, [117] a cowherd
would guard his cows while staying at the root of a tree or out
in the open, since he needs only to be mindful that the cows are
there; so too, there was need for me only to be mindful that
those states were there.

13. "Tireless energy was aroused in me and unremitting
mindfulness was established, my body was tranquil and untrou-
bled, my mind concentrated and unified.

14-23. "Quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unwholesome states, I entered upon and abided in the first
jhana...(«s Sutta 4, §§23-32 ). ..I directly knew: 'Birth is
destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has
been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.'

24. "This was the third true knowledge attained by me in the
third watch of the night. Ignorance was banished and true
knowledge arose, darkness was banished and light arose, as
happens in one who abides diligent, ardent, and resolute.

25. "Suppose, bhikkhus, that in a wooded range there was a
great low-lying marsh near which a large herd of deer lived.
Then a man appeared desiring their ruin, harm, and bondage,
and he closed off the safe and good path that led to their happi-
ness, and he opened up a false path, and he put out a decoy and
set up a dummy so that the large herd of deer might later come
upon calamity, disaster, and loss. But another man came desir-
ing their good, welfare, and protection, and he reopened the
safe and good path that led to their happiness, and he closed off
the false path, and he removed the decoy and destroyed the


210 Dvedhavitakka Sutta: Sutta 19


i 118


dummy, so that the large herd of deer might later come to
growth, increase, and fulfilment.

26. "Bhikkhus, I have given this simile in order to convey a
meaning. [118] This is the meaning: 'The great low-lying marsh'
is a term for sensual pleasures. 'The large herd of deer' is a term
for beings. 'The man desiring their ruin, harm, and bondage' is a
term for Mara the Evil One. 'The false path' is a term for the
wrong eightfold path, that is: wrong view, wrong intention,
wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong effort,
wrong mindfulness, and wrong concentration. 'The decoy' is a
term for delight and lust. 'The dummy' is a term for ignorance.
'The man desiring their good, welfare, and protection' is a term
for the Tathagata, accomplished and fully enlightened. 'The safe
and good path that led to their happiness' is a term for the
Noble Eightfold Path, that is: right view, right intention, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindful-
ness, and right concentration.

"So, bhikkhus, the safe and good path that leads to happiness
has been reopened by me, the wrong path has been closed off,
the decoy removed, the dummy destroyed.

27. "What should be done for his disciples out of compassion
by a teacher who seeks their welfare and has compassion for
them, that I have done for you, bhikkhus. There are these roots
of trees, these empty huts. Meditate, bhikkhus, do not delay or
else you will regret it later. This is our instruction to you."

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


20 Vitakkasanthana Sutta
The Removal of Distracting Thoughts


1. Thus have I heard. 238 On one occasion the Blessed One was
living at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There
he addressed thebhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir,"
[119] they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu is pursuing the higher mind,
from time to time he should give attention to five signs. 239 What
are the five?

3. (i) "Here, bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu is giving attention to
some sign, and owing to that sign there arise in him evil
unwholesome thoughts connected with desire, with hate, and
with delusion, then he should give attention to some other sign
connected with what is wholesome. 240 When he gives attention to
some other sign connected with what is wholesome, then any evil
unwholesome thoughts connected with desire, with hate, and
with delusion are abandoned in him and subside. With the aban-
doning of them his mind becomes steadied internally, quieted,
brought to singleness, and concentrated. Just as a skilled carpen-
ter or his apprentice might knock out, remove, and extract a
coarse peg by means of a fine one, so too... when a bhikkhu
gives attention to some other sign connected with what is
wholesome... his mind becomes steadied internally, quieted,
brought to singleness, and concentrated.

4. (ii) "If, while he is giving attention to some other sign con-
nected with what is wholesome, there still arise in him evil
unwholesome thoughts connected with desire, with hate, and
with delusion, then he should examine the danger in those
thoughts thus: 'These thoughts are unwholesome, they are rep-
rehensible, they result in suffering.' 241 When he examines the
danger in those thoughts, then any evil unwholesome thoughts


211


212 Vitakkasanthana Sutta: Sutta 20



connected with desire, with hate, and with delusion are aban-
doned in him and subside. With the abandoning of them his
mind becomes steadied internally, quieted, brought to singleness,
and concentrated. Just as a man or a woman, young, youthful,
and fond of ornaments, would be horrified, humiliated, and dis-
gusted if the carcass of a snake or a dog or a human being [120]
were hung around his or her neck, so too... when a bhikkhu
examines the danger in those thoughts. . .his mind becomes stead-
ied internally, quieted, brought to singleness, and concentrated.

5. (iii) "If, while he is examining the danger in those thoughts,
there still arise in him evil unwholesome thoughts connected
with desire, with hate, and with delusion, then he should try to
forget those thoughts and should not give attention to them.
When he tries to forget those thoughts and does not give atten-
tion to them, then any evil unwholesome thoughts connected
with desire, with hate, and with delusion are abandoned in him
and subside. With the abandoning of them his mind becomes
steadied internally, quieted, brought to singleness, and concen-
trated. Just as a man with good eyes who did not want to see
forms that had come within range of sight would either shut his
eyes or look away, so too... when a bhikkhu tries to forget those
thoughts and does not give attention to them. ..his mind
becomes steadied internally, quieted, brought to singleness, and
concentrated.

6. (iv) "If, while he is trying to forget those thoughts and is not
giving attention to them, there still arise in him evil unwholesome
thoughts connected with desire, with hate, and with delusion,
then he should give attention to stilling the thought-formation of
those thoughts. 242 When he gives attention to stilling the thought-
formation of those thoughts, then any evil unwholesome
thoughts connected with desire, with hate, and with delusion are
abandoned in him and subside. With the abandoning of them
his mind becomes steadied internally, quieted, brought to sin-
gleness, and concentrated. Just as a man walking fast might con-
sider: 'Why am I walking fast? What if I walk slowly?' and he
would walk slowly; then he might consider: 'Why am I walking
slowly? What if I stand?' and he would stand; then he might
consider: 'Why am I standing? What if I sit?' and he would sit;
then he might consider: 'Why am I sitting? What if I lie down?'
and he would lie down. By doing so he would substitute for


The Removal of Distracting Thoughts 213


i 122

each grosser posture one that was subtler. So too... when a
bhikkhu gives attention to stilling the thought-formation of
those thoughts... his mind becomes steadied internally, quieted,
brought to singleness, and concentrated.

7. (v) "If, while he is giving attention to stilling the thought-
formation of those thoughts, there still arise in him evil
unwholesome thoughts connected with desire, with hate, and
with delusion, then, with his teeth clenched and his tongue
pressed against the roof of his mouth, he should beat down,
constrain, and crush mind with mind. 243 [ 121 ] When, with his
teeth clenched and his tongue pressed against the roof of his
mouth, he beats down, constrains, and crushes mind with mind,
then any evil unwholesome thoughts connected with desire,
with hate, and with delusion are abandoned in him and subside.
With the abandoning of them his mind becomes steadied inter-
nally, quieted, brought to singleness, and concentrated. Just as a
strong man might seize a weaker man by the head or shoulders
and beat him down, constrain him, and crush him, so
too. ..when, with his teeth clenched and his tongue pressed
against the roof of his mouth, a bhikkhu beats down, constrains,
and crushes mind with mind. . .his mind becomes steadied inter-
nally, quieted, brought to singleness, and concentrated.

8. "Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu is giving attention to some
sign, and owing to that sign there arise in him evil unwhole-
some thoughts connected with desire, with hate, and with delu-
sion, then when he gives attention to some other sign connected
with what is wholesome, any such evil unwholesome thoughts
are abandoned in him and subside, and with the abandoning of
them his mind becomes steadied internally, quieted, brought to
singleness, and concentrated. When he examines the danger in
those thoughts... When he tries to forget those thoughts and
does not give attention to them... When he gives attention to
stilling the thought-formation of those thoughts... When, with
his teeth clenched and his tongue pressed against the roof of his
mouth, he beats down, constrains, and crushes mind with mind,
any such evil unwholesome thoughts are abandoned in
him... and his mind becomes steadied internally, quieted, [122]
brought to singleness, and concentrated. This bhikkhu is then
called a master of the courses of thought. He will think what-
ever thought he wishes to think and he will not think any


214 Vitakkasanthana Suita: Suita 20


i 122


thought that he does not wish to think. He has severed craving,
flung off the fetters, and with the complete penetration of con-
ceit he has made an end of suffering." 244

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.




21 Kakacupama Sutta
The Simile of the Saw


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Savatthi in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.

2. Now on that occasion the venerable Moliya Phagguna was
associating overmuch with bhikkhunls. 245 He was associating so
much with bhikkhurus that if any bhikkhu spoke dispraise of
those bhikkhunls in his presence, he would become angry and
displeased and would rebuke him; and if any bhikkhu spoke
dispraise of the venerable Moliya Phagguna in those bhikkhunls'
presence, they would become angry and displeased and would
rebuke him. So much was the venerable Moliya Phagguna asso-
ciating with bhikkhunls.

3. Then a certain bhikkhu went to the Blessed One, and after
paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and told the
Blessed One what was taking place.

4. Then the Blessed One addressed a certain bhikkhu thus:
"Come, [123] bhikkhu, tell the bhikkhu Moliya Phagguna in my
name that the Teacher calls him." - "Yes, venerable sir," he
replied, and he went to the venerable Moliya Phagguna and
told him: "The Teacher calls you, friend Phagguna." - "Yes,
friend," he replied, and he went to the Blessed One, and after
paying homage to him, sat down at one side. The Blessed One
asked him:

5. "Phagguna, is it true that you are associating overmuch
with bhikkhunls, that you are associating so much with
bhikkhunls that if any bhikkhu speaks dispraise of those
bhikkhunls in your presence, you become angry and displeased
and rebuke him; and if any bhikkhu speaks dispraise of you in
those bhikkhunls' presence, they become angry and displeased
and rebuke him. Are you associating so much with bhikkhunls,
as it seems?" - "Yes, venerable sir." - "Phagguna, are you not a


217


a


218 Kakacupama Sutta: Sutta 21 i 124

clansman who has gone forth out of faith from the home life into
homelessness?" - "Yes, venerable sir."

6. "Phagguna, it is not proper for you, a clansman gone forth
out of faith from the home life into homelessness, to associate
overmuch with bhikkhunls. Therefore, if anyone speaks dis-
praise of those bhikkhurus in your presence, you should aban-
don any desires and any thoughts based on the household life.
And herein you should train thus: 'My mind will be unaffected,
and I shall utter no evil words; I shall abide compassionate for
his welfare, with a mind of loving-kindness, without inner hate.'
That is how you should train, Phagguna.

"If anyone gives those bhikkhums a blow with his hand, with
a clod, with a stick, or with a knif gJin your presence, you should
abandon any desires and any thoughts based on the household
life. And herein you should train thus: ‘My mind will be un-
affected...' If anyone speaks dispraise in your presence, you
should abandon any desires and any thoughts based on the
household life. And herein you should train thus: 'My mind will
be unaffected...' If anyone should give you a blow with his
hand, with a clod, with a stick, or with a knife, [124] you should
abandon any desires and any thoughts based on the household
life. And herein you should train thus: 'My mind will be un-
affected, and I shall utter no evil words; I shall abide compas-
sionate for his welfare, with a mind of loving-kindness, without
inner hate.' That is how you should train, Phagguna.

7. Then the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus:
"Bhikkhus, there was an occasion when the bhikkhus satisfied
my mind. Here I addressed the bhikkhus thus: 'Bhikkhus, I eat
at a single session. By so doing, I am free from illness and afflic-
tion, and I enjoy health, strength, and a comfortable abiding.
Come, bhikkhus, eat at a single session. By so doing, you will
be free from illness and affliction, and you will enjoy health,
strength, and a comfortable abiding.' And I had no need to
keep on instructing those bhikkhus; I had only to arouse mind-
fulness in them. 246 Suppose there were a chariot on even
ground at the crossroads, harnessed to thoroughbreds, waiting
with goad lying ready, so that a skilled trainer, a charioteer of
horses to be tamed, might mount it, and taking the reins in his
left hand and the goad in his right hand, might drive out and
back by any road whenever he likes. So too, 1 had no need to


The Simile of the Saw 219



keep on instructing those bhikkhus; I had only to arouse mind-
fulness in them.

8. "Therefore, bhikkhus, abandon what is unwholesome and
devote yourselves to wholesome states, for that is how you will
come to growth, increase, and fulfilment in this Dhamma and
Discipline. Suppose there were a big sala-tree grove near a vil-
lage or town, and it was choked with castor-oil weeds, and some
man would appear desiring its good, welfare, and protection.
He would cut down and throw out the crooked saplings that
robbed the sap, and he would clean up the interior of the grove
and tend the straight well-formed saplings, so that the sala-tree
grove later on would come to growth, increase, and fulfilment.
So too, bhikkhus, abandon what is unwholesome and devote
yourselves to wholesome states, [125] for that is how you will
come to growth, increase, and fulfilment in this Dhamma and
Discipline.

9. "Formerly, bhikkhus, in this same SavatthI there was a
housewife named Vedehika. And a good report about Mistress
Vedehika had spread thus: 'Mistress Vedehika is kind. Mistress
Vedehika i-s gentle. Mistress Vedehika is peaceful.' Now
Mistress Vedehika had a maicHnamed Kali, who was clever,
nimble, and neat in her work./fhe maid Kali thought: 'A good
report about my lady has spread thus: "Mistress Vedehika is
kind. Mistress Vedehika is gentle. Mistress Vedehika is peace-
ful." How is it now, while she does not show anger, is it never-
theless actually present in her or is it absent? Or else is it just
because my work is neat that my lady shows no anger though it
is actually present in her? Suppose I test my lady.'

"So the maid Kali got up late. The Mistress Vedehika said:
'Hey, Kali!' - 'What is it, madam?' - 'What is the matter that you
get up so late?' - 'Nothing is the matter, madam.' - 'Nothing is
the matter, you wicked girl, yet you get up so late!' and she was
angry and displeased, and she scowled. Then the maid Kali
thought: 'The fact is that while my lady does not show anger, it
is actually present in her, not absent; and it is just because my
work is neat that my lady shows no anger though it is actually
present in her, not absent. Suppose I test my lady a little more.'

"So the maid Kali got up later in the day. Then Mistress
Vedehika said: 'Hey, Kali!' - 'What is it, madam?' - 'What is the
matter that you get up later in the day?' - 'Nothing is the matter.


220 Kakacupama Sutta: Sutta 21


i 126



madam.' - 'Nothing is the matter, you wicked girl, yet you get
up later in the day!' and she was angry and displeased, and she
spoke words of displeasure. Then the maid Kali thought: 'The
fact is that while my lady does not show anger, it is actually pre-
sent in her, not absent. Suppose I test my lady a little more.'

"So the maid Kali got up still later in the day. Then Mistress
Vedehika [126] said: 'Hey, Kali!' - 'What is it, madam?' - 'What
is the matter that you get up still later in the day?' - 'Nothing is
the matter, madam.' - 'Nothing is the matter, you wicked girl,
yet you get up still later in the day!' and she was angry and dis-
pleased, and she took p. rolling-pin, gave her a blow on the head,
and cut her head. y'

"Then the maid Kali, with blood running from her cut head,
denounced her mistress to the neighbours: 'See, ladies, the kind
lady's work! See, ladies, the gentle lady’s work! See, ladies, the
peaceful lady's work! How can she become angry and dis-
pleased with her only maid for getting up late? How can she
take a rolling-pin, give her a blow on the head, and cut her
head?' Then later on a bad report about Mistress Vedehika
spread thus: 'Mistress Vedehika is rough, Mistress Vedehika is
violent, Mistress Vedehika is merciless.'

10. "So too, bhikkhus, some bhikkhu is extremely kind,
extremely gentle, extremely peaceful, so long as disagreeable
courses of speech do not touch him. But it is when disagreeable
courses of speech touch him that it can be understood whether
that bhikkhu is really kind, gentle, and peaceful. I do not call a
bhikkhu easy to admonish who is easy to admonish and makes
himself easy to admonish only for the sake of getting robes,
almsfood, a resting place, and medicinal requisites. Why is that?
Because that bhikkhu is not easy to admonish nor makes himself
easy to admonish when he gets no robes, almsfood, resting
place, and medicinal requisites. But when a bhikkhu is easy to
admonish and makes himself easy to admonish because he hon-
ours, respects, and reveres the Dhamma, him I call easy to
admonish. Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train thus: 'We shall
be easy to admonish and make ourselves easy to admonish
because we honour, respect, and revere the Dhamma.' That is
how you should train, bhikkhus.

11. "Bhikkhus, there are these five courses of speech that oth-
ers may use when they address you: their speech may be timely



or untimely, true or untrue, gentle or harsh, connected with
good or with harm, spoken with a mind of loving-kindness or
» w ith inner hate. When others address you, their speech may be
timely or untimely; when others address you, their speech may
be true or untrue; when others address you, their speech may be
gentle or harsh; when others address you, their speech may be
connected with good [127] or with harm; when others address
you, their speech may be spoken with a mind of loving-kindness
or with inner hate. Herein, bhikkhus, you should train thus:
'Our minds will remain unaffected, and we shall utter no evil
words; we shall abide compassionate for their welfare, with a
mind of loving-kindness, without inner hate. We shall abide
pervading that person with a mind imbued with loving-
kindness, and starting with him, 247 we shall abide pervading
the all-encompassing world with a mind imbued with loving-
kindness, abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without hostility
and without ill will.' That is how you should train, bhikkhus.

12. "Bhikkhus, suppose a man came with a hoe and a basket
and said: 'I shall make this great earth to be without earth.' He
would dig here and there, strew the soil here and there, spit here
and there, and urinate here and there, saying: 'Be without earth,
be without earth!' What do you think, bhikkhus? Could that
man make this great earth to be without earth?" - "No, venerable
sir. Why is that? Because this great earth is deep and immense; it
cannot possibly be made to be without earth. Eventually the
man would reap only weariness and disappointment."

13. "So too, bhikkhus, there are these five courses of speech. . .
(as in §11)... Herein, bhikkhus, you should train thus: 'Our
minds will remain unaffected... and starting njith him, we shall
abide pervading the all-encompassing world with a mind similar
to the earth, abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without hostility
and without ill will.' That is how you should train, bhikkhus.

14. "Bhikkhus, suppose a man came with crimson, turmeric,
indigo, or carmine and said: 'I shall draw pictures and make pic-
tures appear on empty space.' What do you think, bhikkhus?
Could that man draw pictures and make pictures appear on
empty space?" - "No, venerable sir. Why is that? Because empty
space is formless and invisible; he cannot possibly draw pictures
there or make pictures appear there. 1128] Eventually the man
Would reap only weariness and disappointment."




222 Kakacupama Sutta: Sutta 21


i 129


15. "So too, bhikkhus, there are these five courses of
speech... Herein, bhikkhus, you should train thus: 'Our minds
will remain unaffected... and starting with him, we shall abide
pervading the all-encompassing world with a mind similar to
empty space, abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without hostili-
ty and without ill will.' That is how you should train, bhikkhus.

16. "Bhikkhus, suppose a man came with a blazing grass-torch
and said: 'I shall heat up and bum away the river Ganges with
this blazing grass-torch.' What do you think, bhikkhus? Could
that man heat up and bum away the river Ganges with that blaz-
ing grass-torch?" - "No, venerable sir. Why is that? Because the
river Ganges is deep and immense; it cannot possibly be heated
up and burned away with a blazing grass-torch. Eventually the
man would reap only weariness and disappointment."

17. "So too, bhikkhus, there are these five courses of
speech... Herein, bhikkhus, you should train thus: 'Our minds
will remain unaffected... and starting with him, we shall abide
pervading the all-encompassing world with a mind similar to the
river Ganges, abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without hostility
and without ill will.' That is how you should train, bhikkhus.

18. "Bhikkhus, suppose there were a catskin bag that was
rubbed, well-rubbed, thoroughly well-rubbed, soft, silky, rid of
rustling, rid of crackling, and a man came with a stick or a
potsherd and said: 'There is this catskin bag that is rubbed... rid
of rustling, rid of crackling. I shall make it rustle and crackle.'
What do you think, bhikkhus? Could that man make it rustle or
crackle with the stick or the potsherd?" - "No, venerable sir.
Why is that? Because that catskin bag being rubbed... rid of
rustling, rid of crackling, cannot possibly be made to rustle or
crackle with the stick or the potsherd. Eventually the man
would reap only weariness and disappointment."

19. "So too, bhikkhus, there are these five courses of speech
that others may use when they address you: their speech may be
timely [129] or untimely, true or untrue, gentle or harsh, con-
nected with good or with harm, spoken with a mind of loving-
kindness or with inner hate. When others address you, their
speech may be timely or untimely; when others address you,
their speech may be true or untrue; when others address you,
their speech may be gentle or harsh; when others address you,
their speech may be connected with good or with harm; when


i 129


The Simile of the Saw 223


others address you, their speech may be spoken with a mind of
loving-kindness or with inner hate. Herein, bhikkhus, you
should train thus: 'Our minds will remain unaffected, and we
shall utter no evil words; we shall abide compassionate for their
welfare, with a mind of loving-kindness, without inner hate. We
shall abide pervading that person with a mind imbued with
loving-kindness; and starting with him, we shall abide pervad-
ing the all-encompassing world with a mind similar to a catskin
bag, abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without hostility and
without ill will.' That is how you should train, bhikkhus.

20. "Bhikkhus, even if bandits were to sever you savagely
limb by limb with a two-handled saw, he who gave rise to a
mind of hate towards them would not be carrying out my teach-
ing. Herein, bhikkhus, you should train thus: 'Our minds will
remain unaffected, and we shall utter no evil words; we shall
abide compassionate for their welfare, with a mind of loving-
kindness, without inner hate. We shall abide pervading them
with a mind imbued with loving-kindness; and starting with
them, we shall abide pervading the all-encompassing world
with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, abundant, exalted,
immeasurable, without hostility and without ill will.' That is
how you should train, bhikkhus.

21. "Bhikkhus, if you keep this advice on the simile of the saw
constantly in mind, do you see any course of speech, trivial or
gross, that you could not endure?" - "No, venerable sir." -
"Therefore, bhikkhus, you should keep this advice on the simile
of the saw constantly in mind. That will lead to your welfare
and happiness for a long time."


That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.






22 Alagaddupama Suit a
The Simile of the Snake


(setting)

[130] 1. Thus have I heard . 248 On one occasion the Blessed One
was living at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.

2. Now on that occasion a pernicious view had arisen in a
bhikkhu named Arittha, formerly of the vulture killers, thus:
"As I understand the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One, those
things called obstructions by the Blessed One are not able to
obstruct one who engages in them." 249

3. Several bhikkhus, having heard about this, went to the
bhikkhu Arittha and asked him: "Friend Arittha, is it true that
such a pernicious view has arisen in you?"

"Exactly so, friends. As I understand the Dhamma taught by
the Blessed One, those things called obstructions by the Blessed
One are not able to obstruct one who engages in them."

Then these bhikkhus, desiring to detach him from that perni-
cious view, pressed and questioned and cross-questioned him
thus: "Friend Arittha, do not say so. Do not misrepresent the
Blessed One; it is not good to misrepresent the Blessed One. The
Blessed One would not speak thus. For in many discourses the
Blessed One has stated how obstructive things are obstructions,
and how they are able to obstruct one who engages in them. The
Blessed One has stated how sensual pleasures provide little
gratification, much suffering, and much despair, and how great
is the danger in them. With the simile of the skeleton... with the
simile of the piece of meat. ..with the simile of the grass
torch... with the simile of the pit of coals... with the simile of the
dream... with the simile of the borrowed goods... with the simile
of the tree laden with fruit... with the simile of the slaughter-
house... with the simile of the sword stake... with the simile of


224


The Simile of the Snake 225


i 132

the snake's head, the Blessed One has stated how sensual plea-
sures provide little gratification, much suffering, and much
despair, and how great is the danger in them." 250

Yet although pressed and questioned and cross-questioned by
them in this way, the bhikkhu Arittha, formerly of the vulture
killers, still obstinately adhered to that pernicious view and con-
tinued to insist upon it.

4. Since the bhikkhus were unable to detach him [131] from that
pernicious view, they went to the Blessed One, and after paying
homage to him, they sat down at one side and told him all that
had occurred, adding: "Venerable sir, since we could not detach
the bhikkhu Arittha, formerly of the vulture killers, from this per-
nicious view, we have reported this matter to the Blessed One."

5. Then the Blessed One addressed a certain bhikkhu thus:
"Come, bhikkhu, tell the bhikkhu Arittha, formerly of the vul-
ture killers, in my name that the Teacher calls him." - [132] "Yes,
venerable sir," he replied, and he went to the bhikkhu Arittha
and told him: "The Teacher calls you, friend Arittha."

"Yes, friend," he replied, and he went to the Blessed One, and
after paying homage to him, sat down at one side. The Blessed
One then asked him: "Arittha, is it true that the following perni-
cious view has arisen in you: 'As I understand the Dhamma
taught by the Blessed One, those things called obstructions by the
Blessed One are not able to obstruct one who engages in them'?"

"Exactly so, venerable sir. As I understand the Dhamma taught
by the Blessed One, those things called obstructions by the
Blessed One are not able to obstruct one who engages in them."

6. "Misguided man, to whom have you ever known me to
teach the Dhamma in that way? Misguided man, in many dis-
courses have I not stated how obstructive things are obstruc-
tions, and how they are able to obstruct one who engages in
them? I have stated how sensual pleasures provide little gratifi-
cation, much suffering, and much despair, and how great is the
danger in them. With the simile of the skeleton...with the simile
of the piece of meat. . .with the simile of the grass torch. . .with the
simile of the pit of coals. . .with the simile of the dream. . .with the
simile of the borrowed goods... with the simile of the tree laden
with fruit. . .with the simile of the slaughterhouse. . .with the sim-
ile of the sword stake... with the simile of the snake's head, I
have stated how sensual pleasures provide little gratification,


226 Alagaddupama Sutta: Sutta 22


i 133


much suffering, and much despair, and how great is the danger in
them. But you, misguided man, have misrepresented us by your
wrong grasp and injured yourself and stored up much demerit;
for this will lead to your harm and suffering for a long time." 251

7. Then the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus:
"Bhikkhus, what do you think? Has this bhikkhu Arittha, for-
merly of the vulture killers, kindled even a spark of wisdom in
this Dhamma and Discipline?"

"How could he, venerable sir? No, venerable sir."

When this was said, the bhikkhu Arittha, formerly of the vul-
ture killers, sat silent, dismayed, with shoulders drooping and
head down, glum, and without response. Then, knowing this,
the Blessed One told him: "Misguided man, you will be recog-
nised by your own pernicious view. I shall question the
bhikkhus on this matter."

8. Then the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus:
"Bhikkhus, [133] do you understand the Dhamma taught by me
as this bhikkhu Arittha, formerly of the vulture killers, does
when he misrepresents us by his wrong grasp and injures him-
self and stores up much demerit?"

"No, venerable sir. For in many discourses the Blessed One
has stated how obstructive things are obstructions, and how
they are able to obstruct one who engages in them. The Blessed
One has stated how sensual pleasures provide little gratifica-
tion, much suffering, and much despair, and how great is the
danger in them. With the simile of the skeleton... with the simile
of the snake's head, the blessed One has stated... how great is
the danger in them."

"Good, bhikkhus. It is good that you understand the
Dhamma taught by me thus. For in many discourses I have
stated how obstructive things are obstructions, and how they
are able to obstruct one who engages in them. I have stated
how sensual pleasures provide little gratification, much suffer-
ing, and much despair, and how great is the danger in them.
With the simile of the skeleton... with the simile of the snake's
head, I have stated... how great is the danger in them. But this
bhikkhu Arittha, formerly of the vulture killers, misrepresents
us by his wrong grasp and injures himself and stores up much
demerit; for this will lead to this misguided man's harm and
suffering for a long time.


9


The Simile of the Snake 227


i 134

9. "Bhikkhus, that one can engage in sensual pleasures with-
out sensual desires, without perceptions of sensual desire, with-
out thoughts of sensual desire - that is impossible. 252

(the simile of the snake)

10. "Here, bhikkhus, some misguided men learn the Dhamma -
discourses, stanzas, expositions, verses, exclamations, sayings,
birth stories, marvels, and answers to questions - but having
learned the Dhamma, they do not examine the meaning of those
teachings with wisdom. Not examining the meaning of those
teachings with wisdom, they do not gain a reflective acceptance
of them. Instead they learn the Dhamma only for the sake of
criticising others and for winning in debates, and they do not
experience the good for the sake of which they learned the
Dhamma. Those teachings, being wrongly grasped by them,
conduce to their harm and suffering for a long time. 253

"Suppose a man needing a snake, seeking a snake, wandering
in search of a snake, saw a large snake and grasped its coils or
its tail. It would turn back on him and bite his hand or his arm
or one of his limbs, [134] and because of that he would come to
death or deadly suffering. Why is that? Because of his wrong
grasp of the snake. So too, here some misguided men learn the
Dhamma... Those teachings, being wrongly grasped by them,
conduce to their harm and suffering for a long time.

11. "Here, bhikkhus, some clansmen learn the Dhamma -
discourses... answers to questions - and having learned the
Dhamma, they examine the meaning of those teachings with
wisdom. Examining the meaning of those teachings with wis-
dom, they gain a reflective acceptance of them. They do not
learn the Dhamma for the sake of criticising others and for win-
ning in debates, and they experience the good for the sake of
which they learned the Dhamma. Those teachings, being rightly
grasped by them, conduce to their welfare and happiness for a
long time.

"Suppose a man needing a snake, seeking a snake, wandering
in search of a snake, saw a large snake and caught it rightly with
a cleft stick, and having done so, grasped it rightly by the neck.
Then although the snake might wrap its coils round his hand or
his arm or his limbs, still he would not come to death or deadly


228 Alagaddupama Sutta: Sutta 22


i 135


suffering because of that. Why is that? Because of his right grasp
of the snake. So too, here some clansmen learn the Dhamma...
Those teachings, being rightly grasped by them, conduce to
their welfare and happiness for a long time.

12. "Therefore, bhikkhus, when you understand the meaning
of my statements, remember it accordingly; and when you do
not understand the meaning of my statements, then ask either
me about it or those bhikkhus who are wise.

(the simile of the raft)

' 13. "Bhikkhus, I shall show you how the Dhamma is similar to
a raft, being for the purpose of crossing over, not for the pur-
pose of grasping. 254 Listen and attend closely to what I shall
say." - "Yes, venerable sir," the bhikkhus replied. The Blessed
One said this:

"Bhikkhus, suppose a man in the course of a journey saw a
great expanse of water, whose near shore was dangerous and
fearful and whose further shore was safe and free from fear, but
there was no ferryboat or bridge going to the far shore. [135]
Then he thought: 'There is this great expanse of water, whose
near shore is dangerous and fearful and whose further shore is
safe and free from fear, but there is no ferryboat or bridge going
to the far shore. Suppose I collect grass, twigs, branches, and
leaves and bind them together into a raft, and supported by the
raft and making an effort with my hands and feet, I got safely
across to the far shore.' And then the man collected grass, twigs,
branches, and leaves and bound them together into a raft, and
supported by the raft and making an effort with his hands and
feet, he got safely across to the far shore. Then, when he had got
across and had arrived at the far shore, he might think thus:
'This raft has been very helpful to me, since supported by it and
making an effort with my hands and feet, I got safely across to
the far shoreiSuppose I were to hoist it on my head or load it on
my shoulder, and then go wherever I want.' Now, bhikkhus,
what do you think? By doing so, would that man be doing what
should be done with that raft?"

"No, venerable sir."

"By doing what would that man be doing what should be
done with that raft? Here, bhikkhus, when that man got across




The Simile of the Snake 229


and had arrived at the far shore, he might think thus: 'This raft
has been very helpful to me, since supported by it and making
an effort with my hands and feet, I got safely across to the far
shore. Suppose I were to haul it onto the dry land or set it adrift
in the water, and then go wherever I want.' Now, bhikkhus, it is
hy so doing that that man would be doing what should be done
with that raft. So I have shown you how the Dhamma is similar
to a raft, being for the purpose of crossing over, not for the pur-
pose of grasping.

14. "Bhikkhus, when you know the Dhamma to be similar to a
raft, you should abandon even good states, how much more so
bad states. 255 /

(standpoints for views)

15. "Bhikkhus, there are these six standpoints for views. 256 What
are the six? Here, bhikkhus, an untaught ordinary person, who
has no regard for noble ones and is unskilled and undisciplined
in their Dhamma, who has no regard for true men and is
unskilled and undisciplined in their Dhamma, regards material
form thus: 'This is mine, this I am, this is my self.' 257 He regards
feeling thus: 'This is mine, this I am, this is my self.' He regards
perception thus: 'This is mine, this I am, this is my self.' He
regards formations thus: 'This is mine, this I am, this is my self.'
He regards what is seen, heard, sensed, cognized, encountered,
sought, mentally pondered thus: 'This is mine, this I am, this is
my self.' 258 And this standpoint for views, namely, "This is self,
this the world; after death I shall be permanent, everlasting,
eternal, not subject to change; [136] I shall endure as long as
eternity' - this too he regards thus: 'This is mine, this I am, this
is my self.' 259

16. "Bhikkhus, a well-taught noble disciple who has regard for
noble ones and is skilled and disciplined in their Dhamma, who
has regard for true men and is skilled and disciplined in their
Dhamma, regards material form thus: 'This is not mine, this I
am not, this is not my self.' He regards feeling thus: 'This is not
mine, this I am not, this is not my self.' He regards perception
thus: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.' He
regards formations thus: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is
not my self.' He regards what is seen, heard, sensed, cognized.


230 Alagaddupama Sutta: Sutta 22


i 137


encountered, sought, mentally pondered thus: 'This is not mine,
this I am not, this is not my self.' And this standpoint for views,
namely, 'This is self, this the world; after death I shall be perma-
nent, everlasting, eternal, not subject to change; I shall endure as
long as eternity' - this too he regards thus: 'This is not mine, this
I am not, this is not my self.'

17. "Since he regards them thus, he is not agitated about what
is non-existent." 260

(agitation)

18. When this was said, a certain bhikkhu asked the Blessed
One: "Venerable sir, can there be agitation about what is non-
existent externally?"

"There can be, bhikkhu," the Blessed One said. "Here,
bhikkhu, someone thinks thus: 'Alas, I had it! Alas, I have it no
longer! Alas, may I have it! Alas, I do not get it!' Then he sor-
rows, grieves, and laments, he weeps beating his breast and
becomes distraught. That is how there is agitation about what is
non-existent externally."

19. "Venerable sir, can there be no agitation about what is
non-existent externally?"

"There can be, bhikkhu," the Blessed One said. "Here,
bhikkhu, someone does not think thus: 'Alas I had it! Alas, I
have it no longer! Alas, may I have it! Alas, I do not get it!' Then
he does not sorrow, grieye, and lament, he does not weep beat-
ing his breast and become distraught. That is how there is no
agitation about what is non-existent externally."

20. "Venerable sir, can there be agitation about what is non-
existent internally?"

"There can be, bhikkhu," the Blessed One said. "Here,
bhikkhu, someone has the view: 'This is self, this the world;
after death I shall be permanent, everlasting, eternal, not subject
to change; I shall endure as long as eternity.' He hears the
Tathagata or a disciple of the Tathagata teaching the Dhamma
for the elimination of all standpoints, decisions, obsessions,
adherences, and underlying tendencies, for the stilling of all for-
mations, for the relinquishing of all attachments, for the destruc-
tion of craving, for dispassion, for cessation, for Nibbana. He
[137] thinks thus: 'So I shall be annihilated! So I shall perish! So I


The Simile of the Snake 231


shall be no more!' Then he sorrows, grieves, and laments, he
weeps beating his breast and becomes distraught. That is how
there is agitation about what is non-existent internally."

21. "Venerable sir, can there be no agitation about what is
non-existent internally?"

"There can be, bhikkhu," the Blessed One said. "Here,
bhikkhu, someone does not have the view: 'This is self... I shall
endure as long as eternity.' He hears the Tathagata or a disciple
of the Tathagata teaching the Dhamma for the elimination of all
standpoints, decisions, obsessions, adherences, and underlying
tendencies, for the stilling of all formations, for the relinquishing
of all attachments, for the destruction of craving, for dispassion,
for cessation, for Nibbana. He does not think thus: 'So I shall be
annihilated! So. I shall perish! So I shall be no more!' Then he
does not sorrow, grieve, and lament, he does not weep beating
his breast and become distraught. That is how there is no agita-
tion about what is non-existent internally.

(impermanence and not self)

22. "Bhikkhus, you may well acquire that possession that is per-
manent, everlasting, eternal, not subject to change, and that
might endure as long as eternity. 261 But do you see any such
possession, bhikkhus?" - "No, venerable sir." - "Good,
bhikkhus. I too do not see any possession that is permanent,
everlasting, eternal, not subject to change, and that might
endure as long as eternity.

23. "Bhikkhus, you may well cling to that doctrine of self that
would not arouse sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair
in one who clings to it. 262 But do you see any such doctrine of
self, bhikkhus?" - "No, venerable sir." - "Good, bhikkhus. I too
do not see any doctrine of self that would not arouse sorrow,
lamentation, pain, grief, and despair in one who clings to it.

24. "Bhikkhus, you may well take as a support that view that
would not arouse sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair
in one who takes it as a support. 263 But do you see any such sup-
port of views, bhikkhus?" - "No, venerable sir." - "Good,
bhikkhus. I too do not see any support of views [138] that would
not arouse sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair in one
who takes it as a support.




232 Alagaddttpama Sutta: Sutta 22


i 139


25. "Bhikkhus, there being a self, would there be what belongs
to my self?" 264 - "Yes, venerable sir." - "Or, there being what
belongs to a self, would there be my self?" - "Yes, venerable
sir." - "Bhikkhus, since a self and what belongs to a self are not
apprehended as true and established, then this standpoint for
views, namely. This is self, this the world; after death I shall be
permanent, everlasting, eternal, not subject to change; I shall
endure as long as eternity' - would it not be an utterly and com-
pletely foolish teaching?"

"What else could it be, venerable sir? It would be an utterly
and completely foolish teaching."

26. "Bhikkhus, what do you think? Is material form perma-
nent or impermanent?" - "Impermanent, venerable sir." - "Is
what is impermanent suffering or happiness?" - "Suffering,
venerable sir." - "Is what is impermanent, suffering, and subject
to change, fit to be regarded thus: 'This is mine, this I am, this is
my self'?" - "No, venerable sir."

"Bhikkhus, what do you think? Is feeling. ..Is perception...
Are formations... Is consciousness permanent or imperma-
nent?" - "Impermanent, venerable sir." - "Is what is imperma-
nent suffering or happiness?" - "Suffering, venerable sir." - "Is
what is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change, fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, this I am, this is my self'?" - "No,
venerable sir."

27. "Therefore, bhikkhus, any kind of material form whatever,
whether past, future, or present, internal or external, [139] gross
or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near, all material form
should be seen as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: 'This is
not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.' Any kind of feeling
whatever... Any kind of perception whatever... Any kind of for-
mations whatever. ..Any kind of consciousness whatever,
whether past, future, or present, internal or external, gross or
subtle, inferior or superior, far or near, all consciousness should
be seen as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: 'This is not
mine, this I am not, this is not my self.'

28. "Seeing thus, bhikkhus, a well-taught noble disciple
becomes disenchanted with material form, disenchanted with
feeling, disenchanted with perception, disenchanted with for-
mations, disenchanted with consciousness.


The Simile of the Snake 233


i 140

29. "Being disenchanted, he becomes dispassionate. Through
dispassion [his mind] is liberated. 265 When it is liberated there
comes the knowledge: 'It is liberated/ He understands: 'Birth is
destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has
been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.'

(THE ARAHANT)

30. "Bhikkhus, this bhikkhu is called one whose shaft has been
lifted, whose trench has been filled in, whose pillar has been
uprooted, one who has no bar, a noble one whose banner is low-
ered, whose burden is lowered, who is unfettered.

31. "And how is the bhikkhu one whose shaft has been lifted?
Here the bhikkhu has abandoned ignorance, has cut it off at the
root, made it like a palm stump, done away with it, so that it is
no longer subject to future arising. That is how the bhikkhu is
one whose shaft has been lifted.

32. "And how is the bhikkhu one whose trench has been filled
in? Here the bhikkhu has abandoned the round of births that
brings renewed being, has cut it off at the root... so that it is no
longer subject to future arising. That is how the bhikkhu is one
whose trench has been filled in.

33. "And how is the bhikkhu one whose pillar has been
uprooted? Here the bhikkhu has abandoned craving, has cut it
off at the root... so that it is no longer subject to future arising.
That is how the bhikkhu is one whose pillar has been uprooted.

34. "And how is the bhikkhu one who has no bar? Here the
bhikkhu has abandoned the five lower fetters, has cut them off
at the root... so that they are no longer subject to future arising.
That is how the bhikkhu is one who has no bar.

35. "And how is the bhikkhu a noble one whose banner is
lowered, whose burden is lowered, who is unfettered? Here a
bhikkhu has abandoned the conceit T am,' has cut it off at the
root [140]... so that it is no longer subject to future arising. That
is how the bhikkhu is a noble one whose banner is lowered,
whose burden is lowered, who is unfettered.

36. "Bhikkhus, when the gods with Indra, with Brahma and
with Pajapati seek a bhikkhu who is thus liberated in mind, they
do not find [anything of which they could say]: "The consciousness


234 Alagaddupama Sutta: Sutta 22


i 140


of one thus gone is supported by this.' Why is that? One thus
gone, I say, is untr ace able here and now. 266

(misrepresentation of the tathAgata)

37. "So saying, bhikkhus, so proclaiming, I have been baselessly,
vainly, falsely, and wrongly misrepresented by some recluses
and brahmins thus: 'The recluse Gotama is one who leads
astray; he teaches the annihilation, the destruction, the extermi-
nation of an existing being.' 267 As I am not, as I do not proclaim,
so have I been baselessly, vainly, falsely, and wrongly misrepre-
sented by some recluses and brahmins thus: 'The recluse
Gotama is one who leads astray; he teaches the annihilation, the
destruction, the extermination of an existing being.'

38. "Bhikkhus, both formerly and now what I teach is suffer-
ing and the cessation of suffering. 268 If others abuse, revile,
scold, and harass the Tathagata for that, the Tathagata on that
account feels no annoyance, bitterness, or dejection of the heart.
And if others honour, respect, revere, and venerate the
Tathagata for that, the Tathagata on that account feels no
delight, joy, or elation of the heart. If others honour, respect,
revere, and venerate the Tathagata for that, the Tathagata on
that account thinks thus: 'They perform such services as these
for the sake of what had earlier come to be fully understood.' 269

39. "Therefore, bhikkhus, if others abuse, revile, scold, and
harass you, on that account you should not entertain any annoy-
ance, bitterness, or dejection of the heart. And if others honour,
respect, revere, and venerate you, on that account you should
not entertain any delight, joy, or elation of the heart. If others
honour, respect, revere, and venerate you, on that account you
should think thus: 'They perform such services as these for the
sake of what had earlier come to be fully understood.'

(not yours)

40. "Therefore, bhikkhus, whatever is not yours, abandon it;
when you have abandoned it, that will lead to your welfare and
happiness for a long time. What is it that is not yours? Material
form is not yours. Abandon it. When you have abandoned it,
that will lead to your welfare and happiness for a long time.



The Simile of the Snake 235


r

r i 141

peeling is not yours. [141] Abandon it. When you have aban-
doned it, that will lead to your welfare and happiness for a long
time. Perception is not yours. Abandon it. When you have
abandoned it, that will lead to your welfare and happiness for a
long time. Formations are not yours. Abandon them. When you
have abandoned them, that will lead to your welfare and happi-
ness for a long time. Consciousness is not yours. Abandon it.
When you have abandoned it, that will lead to your welfare and
happiness for a long time. 270

41. "Bhikkhus, what do you think? If people carried off the
grass, sticks, branches, and leaves in this Jeta Grove, or burned
them, or did what they liked with them, would you think:
'People are carrying us off or burning us or doing what they like
with us'?" - "No, venerable sir. Why not? Because that is neither
our self nor what belongs to our self." - "So too, bhikkhus,
whatever is not yours, abandon it; when you have abandoned it,
that will lead to your welfare and happiness for a long time.
What is it that is not yours? Material form is not yours. . .Feeling
is not yours... Perception is not yours... Formations are not
yours. . .Consciousness is not yours. Abandon it. When you have
abandoned it, that will lead to your welfare and happiness for a
long time.

(in this dhamma)

42. "Bhikkhus, the Dhamma well proclaimed by me thus is
clear, open, evident, and free of patchwork. 271 In the Dhamma
well proclaimed by me thus, which is clear, open, evident, and
free of patchwork, there is no [future] round for manifestation in
the case of those bhikkhus who are arahants with taints
destroyed, who have lived the holy life, done what had to be
done, laid down the burden, reached the true goal, destroyed
the fetters of being, and are completely liberated through final
knowledge. 272

43. "Bhikkhus, the Dhamma well proclaimed by me thus is
clear... free of patchwork. In the Dhamma well proclaimed by
nre thus, which is clear. . .free of patchwork, those bhikkhus who
have abandoned the five lower fetters are all due to reappear
spontaneously [in the Pure Abodes] and there attain final
Nibbana, without ever returning from that world.


236 Alagaddupama Sutta: Sutta 22


i 142


44. "Bhikkhus, the Dhamma well proclaimed by me thus is
clear... free of patchwork. In the Dhamma well proclaimed by
me thus, which is clear. . .free of patchwork, those bhikkhus who
have abandoned the three lower fetters and attenuated lust,
hate, and delusion are all once-returners, returning once to this
world to make an end of suffering.

45. "Bhikkhus, the Dhamma well proclaimed by me thus is
clear... free of patchwork. In the Dhamma well proclaimed by
me thus, which is clear. . .free of patchwork, those bhikkhus who
have abandoned three fetters are all stream-enterers, no longer
subject to perdition, [142] bound [for deliverance] and headed
for enlightenment.

46. "Bhikkhus, the Dhamma well proclaimed by me thus is
clear... free of patchwork. In the Dhamma well proclaimed by
me thus, which is clear... free of patchwork, those bhikkhus who
are Dhamma-followers or faith-followers are all headed for
enlightenment. 273

47. "Bhikkhus, the Dhamma well proclaimed by me thus is
clear, open, evident, and free of patchwork. In the Dhamma well
proclaimed by me thus, which is clear, open, evident, and free of
patchwork, those bhikkhus who have sufficient faith in me, suf-
ficient love for me, are all headed for heaven." 274

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


23 Vammika Sutta
The Ant-hill


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. Now on
that occasion the venerable Kumara Kassapa was living in the
Blind Men's Grove. 275

Then, when the night was well advanced, a certain deity of
beautiful appearance who illuminated the whole of the Blind
Men's Grove approached the venerable Kumara Kassapa and
stood at one side. 276 So standing, the deity said to him:

2. "Bhikkhu, bhikkhu, this ant-hill fumes by night and flames
by day. 277

"Thus spoke the brahmin: 'Delve with the knife, thou wise
one.' Delving with the knife, the wise one saw a bar: 'A bar, O
venerable sir.'

"Thus spoke the brahmin: 'Throw out the bar; delve with the
knife, thou wise one.' Delving with the knife, the wise one saw a
toad: 'A toad, O venerable sir.'

"Thus spoke the brahmin: 'Throw out the toad; delve with the
knife, thou wise one.' Delving with the knife, the wise one saw a
fork: 'A fork, O venerable sir.'

"Those spoke the brahmin: 'Throw out the fork; delve with
the knife, thou wise one.' Delving with the knife, the wise one
saw a sieve: 'A sieve, O venerable sir.'

"Thus spoke the brahmin: [143] 'Throw out the sieve; delve
with the knife, thou wise one.' Delving with the knife, the wise
one saw a tortoise: 'A tortoise, O venerable sir.'

"Thus spoke the brahmin: 'Throw out the tortoise; delve with
the knife, thou wise one.' Delving with the knife, the wise one
saw an axe and block: 'An axe and block, O venerable sir.'


237


238 Vammika Sutta: Sutta 23


i 144


"Thus spoke the brahmin: 'Throw out the axe and block; delve
with the knife, thou wise one.' Delving with the knife, the wise
one saw a piece of meat: 'A piece of meat, O venerable sir.'

"Thus spoke the brahmin: 'Throw out the piece of meat; delve
with the knife, thou wise one.' Delving with the knife, the wise
one saw a Naga serpent: 'A Naga serpent, O venerable sir.'

"Thus spoke the brahmin: 'Leave the Naga serpent; do not
harm the Naga serpent; honour the Naga serpent.'

"Bhikkhu, you should go to the Blessed One and ask him
about this riddle. As the Blessed One tells you, so should you
remember it. Bhikkhu, other than the Tathagata or a disciple of
the Tathagata or one who has learned it from them, I see no one
in this world with its gods, its Maras, and its Brahmas, in this
generation with its recluses and brahmins, its princes and its
people, whose explanation of this riddle might satisfy the mind."

That is what was said by the deity, who thereupon vanished
at once.

3. Then, when the night was over, the venerable Kumara
Kassapa went to the Blessed One. After paying homage to him,
he sat down at one side and told the Blessed One what had
occurred. Then he asked: "Venerable sir, what is the ant-hill,
what the fuming by night, what the flaming by day? Who is the
brahmin, who the wise one? What is the knife, what the delving,
what the bar, what the toad, what the fork, what the sieve, what
the tortoise, what the axe and block, what the piece of meat,
what the Naga serpent?" [144]

4. "Bhikkhu, the ant-hifl is a symbol for this body, made of
material form, consisting of the four great elements, procreated
by a mother and father, built up out of boiled rice and por-
ridge, 278 and subject to impermanence, to being worn and
rubbed away, to dissolution and disintegration.

"What one thinks and ponders by night based upon one's
actions during the day is the 'fuming by night.'

"The actions one undertakes during the day by body, speech,
and mind after thinking and pondering by night is the 'flaming
by day.'

"The brahmin is a symbol for the Tathagata, accomplished
and fully enlightened. The wise one is a symbol for a bhikkhu in
higher training. The knife is a symbol for noble wisdom. The
delving is a symbol for the arousing of energy.


The Ant-hill 239


i 145

"The bar is a symbol for ignorance. 279 'Throw out the bar:
abandon ignorance. Delve with the knife, thou wise one.' This is
the meaning.

"The toad is a symbol for the despair due to anger. 'Throw out
the toad: abandon despair due to anger. Delve with the knife,
thou wise one.' This is the meaning.

"The fork is a symbol for doubt. 280 'Throw out the fork: abandon
doubt. Delve with the knife, thou wise one.' This is the meaning.

"The sieve is a symbol for the five hindrances, namely, the
hindrance of sensual desire, the hindrance of ill will, the hin-
drance of sloth and torpor, the hindrance of restlessness and
remorse, and the hindrance of doubt. 'Throw out the sieve:
abandon the five hindrances. Delve with the knife, thou wise
one.' This is the meaning.

"The tortoise is a symbol for the five aggregates affected by
clinging, 281 namely, the material form aggregate affected by cling-
ing, the feeling aggregate affected by clinging, the perception
aggregate affected by clinging, the formations aggregate affected
by clinging, and the consciousness aggregate affected by clinging.
'Throw out the tortoise: abandon the five aggregates affected by
clinging. Delve with the knife, thou wise one.' This is the meaning.

"The axe and block is a symbol for the five cords of sensual
pleasure 282 - forms cognizable by the eye that are wished for,
desired, agreeable, and likeable, connected with sensual desire,
and provocative of lust; sounds cognizable by the ear... odours
cognizable by the nose... flavours cognizable by the tongue...
tangibles cognizable by the body that are wished for, desired,
agreeable, and likeable, connected with sensual desire, [145] and
provocative of lust. 'Throw out the axe and block: abandon the
five cords of sensual pleasure. Delve with the knife, thou wise
one.' This is the meaning.

"The piece of meat is a symbol for delight and lust. 283 'Throw
out the piece of meat: abandon delight and lust. Delve with the
knife, thou wise one.' This is the meaning.

"The Naga serpent is a symbol for a bhikkhu who has
destroyed the taints. 284 'Leave the Naga serpent; do not harm the
Naga serpent; honour the Naga serpent.' This is the meaning."

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Kumara
Kassapa was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.



n


24 Rathavinita Sutta
The Relay Chariots


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Rajagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels' Sanctuary.

2. Then a number of bhikkhus from [the Blessed One's] native
land, 285 who had spent the Rams there, went to the Blessed One,
and after paying homage to him, sat down at one side. The
Blessed One asked them: "Bhikkhus, who in [my] native land is
esteemed by the bhikkhus there, by his companions in the holy
life, in this way: 'Having few wishes himself, he talks to the
bhikkhus on fewness of wishes; content himself, he talks to the
bhikkhus on contentment; secluded himself, he talks to the
bhikkhus on seclusion; aloof from society himself, he talks to the
bhikkhus on aloofness from society; energetic himself, he talks
to the bhikkhus on arousing energy; attained to virtue himself,
he talks to the bhikkhus on the attainment of virtue; attained to
concentration himself, he talks to the bhikkhus on the attain-
ment of concentration; attained to wisdom himself, he talks to
the bhikkhus on the attainment of wisdom; attained to deliver-
ance himself, he talks to the bhikkhus on the attainment of
deliverance; attained to the knowledge and vision of deliverance
himself, he talks to the bhikkhus on the attainment of the knowl-
edge and vision of deliverance; 286 he is one who advises,
informs, instructs, urges, [146] rouses, and encourages his com-
panions in the holy life'?"

"Venerable sir, the venerable Punna Mantaniputta is so
esteemed in the [Blessed One's] native land by the bhikkhus
there, by his companions in the holy life." 287

3. Now on that occasion the venerable Sariputta was seated
near the Blessed One. Then it occurred to the venerable Sari-
putta: "It is a gain for the venerable Punna Mantaniputta, it is a
great gain for him that his wise companions in the holy life


240


The Relay Chariots 241


i 147

praise him point by point in the Teacher's presence. Perhaps
sometime or other we might meet the venerable Punna
Mantaniputta and have some conversation with him."

4. Then, when the Blessed One had stayed at Rajagaha as long
as he chose, he set out to wander by stages to Savatthl.
Wandering by stages, he eventually arrived at Savatthl, and
there he lived in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.

5. The venerable Punna Mantaniputta heard: "The Blessed
One has arrived at Savatthl and is living in Jeta's Grove, Anatha-
pindika's Park." Then the venerable Punna Mantaniputta set his
resting place in order, and taking his outer robe and bowl, set
out to wander by stages to Savatthl Wandering by stages, he
eventually arrived at Savatthl and went to Jeta's Grove, Anatha-
pindika's Park, to see the Blessed One. After paying homage to
the Blessed One, he sat down at one side and the Blessed One
instructed, urged, roused, and encouraged him with talk on the
Dhamma. Then the venerable Punna Mantaniputta, instructed,
urged, roused, and encouraged by the Blessed One's talk on the
Dhamma, delighting and rejoicing in the Blessed One's words,
rose from his seat, and after paying homage to the Blessed One,
keeping him on his right, he went to the Blind Men's Grove for
the day's abiding.

6. Then a certain bhikkhu went to the venerable Sariputta and
said to him: "Friend Sariputta, the bhikkhu Punna Mantaniputta
of whom you have always spoken highly [147] has just been
instructed, urged, roused, and encouraged by the Blessed One
with talk on the Dhamma; after delighting and rejoicing in the
Blessed One's words, he rose from his seat, and after paying
homage to the Blessed One, keeping him on his right, he has
gone to the Blind Men's Grove for the day's abiding."

7. Then the venerable Sariputta quickly picked up a mat and
followed close behind the venerable Purina Mantaniputta, keep-
ing his head in sight. Then the venerable Punna Mantaniputta
entered the Blind Men's Grove and sat down for the day's abid-
ing at the root of a tree. The venerable Sariputta also entered the
Blind Men's Grove and sat down for the day's abiding at the
root of a tree.

8. Then, when it was evening, the venerable Sariputta rose
from meditation, went to the venerable Punna Mantaniputta,
and exchanged greetings with him. When this courteous and


242 Rathavimta Sutta: Sutta 24


i 148


amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and said to
the venerable Punna Mantaniputta:

9. "Is the holy life lived under our Blessed One, friend?" -
"Yes, friend." - "But, friend, is it for the sake of purification of
virtue that the holy life is lived under the Blessed One?" - "No,
friend." - "Then is it for the sake of purification of mind that the
holy life is lived under the Blessed One?" - “No, friend." -
"Then is it for the sake of purification of view that the holy life is
lived under the Blessed One?" - "No, friend." - "Then is it for
the sake of purification by overcoming doubt that the holy life is
lived under the Blessed One?" - "No, friend." - "Then is it for
the sake of purification by knowledge and vision of what is the
path and what is not the path that the holy life is lived under the
Blessed One?" - "No, friend." - "Then is it for the sake of purifi-
cation by knowledge and vision of the way that the holy life is
lived under the Blessed One?" - "No, friend." - "Then is it for
the sake of purification by knowledge and vision that the holy
life is lived under the Blessed One?" - "No, friend." 288

10. "Friend, when asked: 'But, friend, is it for the sake of
purification of virtue that the holy life is lived under the Blessed
One?' you replied: 'No, friend.’ When asked: 'Then is it for the
sake of purification of mind... purification of view... purification
by overcoming doubt. . .purification by knowledge and vision of
what is the path and what is not the path... purification by
knowledge and vision of the way... purification by knowledge
and vision that the holy life is lived under the Blessed One?' you
replied: 'No, friend.' Foi; the sake of what then, friend, [148] is
the holy life lived under the Blessed One?"

"Friend, it is for the sake of final Nibbana without clinging
that the holy life is lived under the Blessed One." 289

11. "But, friend, is purification of virtue final Nibbana without
clinging?" - "No, friend." - "Then is purification of mind final
Nibbana without clinging?" - "No, friend." - "Then is purification
of view final Nibbana without clinging?" - "No, friend." - "Then
is purification by overcoming doubt final Nibbana without cling-
ing?" - "No, friend." - "Then is purification by knowledge and
vision of what is the path and what is not the path final Nibbana
without clinging?" - "No, friend." - "Then is purification by
knowledge and vision of the way final Nibbana without cling-
ing?" - "No, friend." - "Then is purification by knowledge and


The Relay Chariots 243



vision final Nibbana without clinging?" - "No, friend." - "But,
friend, is final Nibbana without clinging to be attained without
these states?" - "No, friend."

12. "When asked: 'But, friend, is purification of virtue final
Nibbana without clinging?' you replied: 'No, friend.' When
asked: 'Then is purification of mind. ..purification of
view. ..purification by overcoming doubt... purification by
knowledge and vision of what is the path and what is not the
path... purification by knowledge and vision of the way... purifi-
cation by knowledge and vision final Nibbana without cling-
ing?' you replied: 'No, friend.' And when asked: 'But, friend, is
final Nibbana without clinging to be attained without these
states?' you replied: 'No, friend.' But how, friend, should the
meaning of these statements be regarded?"

13. "Friend, if the Blessed One had described purification of
virtue as final Nibbana without clinging, he would have
described what is still accompanied by clinging as final Nibbana
without clinging. If the Blessed One had described purification of
mind. ..purification of view. ..purification by overcoming
doubt. . .purification by knowledge and vision of what is the path
and what is not the path... purification by knowledge and vision
of the way... purification by knowledge and vision as final
Nibbana without clinging, he would have described what is still
accompanied by clinging as final Nibbana without clinging. 290
And if final Nibbana without clinging were to be attained with-
out these states, then an ordinary person would have attained
final Nibbana, for an ordinary person is without these states.

14. "As to that, friend, I shall give you a simile, for some wise
men understand the meaning of a statement by means of a sim-
ile. Suppose that King Pasenadi of Kosala while living at
Savatthl [149] had some urgent business to settle at Saketa, and
that between Savatthl and Saketa seven relay chariots were kept
ready for him. Then King Pasenadi of Kosala, leaving Savatthl
through the inner palace door, would mount the first relay char-
iot, and by means of the first relay chariot he would arrive at the
second relay chariot; then he would dismount from the first
chariot and mount the second chariot, and by means of the sec-
ond chariot, he would arrive at the third chariot. . .by means of
the third chariot, he would arrive at the fourth chariot. . .by means
of the fourth chariot, he would arrive at the fifth chariot... by


244 Rathavinita Sutta: Sutta 24


i 150


means of the fifth chariot, he would arrive at the sixth char-
iot. . .by means of the sixth chariot, he would arrive at the sev-
enth chariot, and by means of the seventh chariot he would
arrive at the inner palace door in Saketa. Then, when he had
come to the inner palace door, his friends and acquaintances, his
kinsmen and relatives, would ask him: 'Sire, did you come from
Savatthl to the inner palace door in Saketa by means of this relay
chariot?' How then should King Pasenadi of Kosala answer in
order to answer correctly?"

"In order to answer correctly, friend, he should answer thus:
'Here, while living at Savatthl I had some urgent business to set-
tle at Saketa, and between Savatthl and Saketa seven relay char-
iots were kept ready for me. Then, leaving Savatthl through the
inner palace door, I mounted the first relay chariot, and by
means of the first relay chariot I arrived at the second relay char-
iot; then I dismounted from the first chariot and mounted the
second chariot, and by means of the second chariot I arrived at
the third... fourth... fifth... sixth... seventh chariot, and by means
of the seventh chariot I arrived at the inner palace door in
Saketa.' In order to answer correctly he should answer thus."

15. "So too, friend, purification of virtue is for the sake of
reaching purification of mind; purification of mind is for the
sake of reaching purification of view; purification of view is for
the sake of reaching purification by overcoming doubt; purifica-
tion by overcoming doubt [150] is for the sake of reaching purifi-
cation by knowledge and vision of what is the path and what is
not the path; purificatiori by knowledge and vision of what is
the path and what is not the path is for the sake of reaching
purification by knowledge and vision of the way; purification
by knowledge and vision of the way is for the sake of reaching
purification by knowledge and vision; purification by knowl-
edge and vision is for the sake of reaching final Nibbana with-
out clinging. It is for the sake of final Nibbana without clinging
that the holy life is lived under the Blessed One."

16. When this was said, the venerable Sariputta asked the
venerable Punna Mantaniputta: "What is the venerable one's
name, and how do his companions in the holy life know the
venerable one?" 291

"My name is Punna, friend, and my companions in the holy
life know me as Mantaniputta."


The Relay Chariots 245


i 151

"It is wonderful, friend, it is marvellous! Each profound ques-
tion has been answered, point by point, by the venerable Punna
jylantaniputta as a learned disciple who understands the
Teacher's Dispensation correctly. It is a gain for his companions
■ n the holy life, it is a great gain for them that they have the
opportunity to see and honour the venerable Punna
Mantaniputta. Even if it were by carrying the venerable Punna
Mantaniputta about on a cushion on their heads that his com-
panions in tire holy life would get the opportunity to see and
honour him, it would be a gain for them, a great gain for them.
And it is a gain for us, a great gain for us that we have the
opportunity to see and honour the venerable Punna
Mantaniputta."

17. When this was said, the venerable Punna Mantaniputta
asked the venerable Sariputta: "What is the venerable one's
name, and how do his companions in the holy life know the
venerable one?"

"My name is Upatissa, friend, and my companions in the holy
life know me as Sariputta."

"Indeed, friend, we did not know that we were talking with
the venerable Sariputta, the disciple who is like the Teacher
himself. 292 If we had known that this was the venerable Sariput-
ta, we should not have said so much. It is wonderful, friend, it is
marvellous! Each profound question has been posed, point by
point, by the venerable Sariputta as a learned disciple who
understands the Teacher's Dispensation correctly. It is a gain for
his companions in the holy life, it is a great gain for them that
they have the opportunity to see and honour the venerable
Sariputta. Even if it were by carrying the venerable Sariputta
about on a cushion on their heads that his companions in the
holy life would get the opportunity to see and honour him, [151]
it would be a gain for them, a great gain for them. And it is a
gain for us, a great gain for us that we have the opportunity to
see and honour the venerable Sariputta."

Thus it was that these two great beings rejoiced in each other's
good words.




25 Nivapa Sutta
The Bait


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There he
addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, a deer-trapper does not lay down bait for a deer
herd intending thus: 'May the deer herd enjoy this bait that I
have laid down and so be long-lived and handsome and endure
for a long time.' A deer-trapper lays down bait for a deer herd
intending thus: 'The deer herd will eat food unwarily by going
right in amongst the bait that I have laid down; by so doing they
will become intoxicated; when they are intoxicated, they will fall
into negligence; when they are negligent, I can do with them as I
like on account of this bait/

3. "Now the deer of the first herd ate food unwarily by going
right in amongst the bait that the deer-trapper had laid down; by
so doing they became intoxicated; when they were intoxicated,
they fell into negligence,' * when they were negligent, the deer-
trapper did with them as he liked on account of that bait. That is
how the deer of the first herd failed to get free from the deer-
trapper's power and control.

4. "Now the deer of a second herd reckoned thus: 'The deer of
that first herd, by acting as they did without precaution, [152]
failed to get free from the deer-trapper's power and control.
Suppose we altogether shun that bait food; shunning that fearful
enjoyment, let us go out into the forest wilds and live there.'
And they did so. But in the last month of the hot season when
the grass and the water were used up, their bodies were reduced
to extreme emaciation; with that they lost their strength and
energy; when they had lost their strength and energy, they
returned to that same bait that the deer-trapper had laid down.



246


The Bait 247



1154


Xhey ate food unwarily by going right in amongst it. By so
doing they became intoxicated; when they were intoxicated they
fell into negligence; when they were negligent, the deer-trapper
did with them as he liked on account of that bait. And that is
how the deer of the second herd also failed to get free from the
deer-trapper's power and control.

5. "Now the deer of a third herd reckoned thus: 'The deer of
that first herd, by acting as they did without precaution, failed
to get free from the deer-trapper's power and control. The deer
of that second herd, by reckoning how the deer of the first herd
had failed and by planning and acting as they did with the pre-
caution of going to live in the forest wilds, also failed to get free
from the deer-trapper's power and control. Suppose we make
our dwelling place within range of the deer-trapper's bait. [153]
Then, having done so, we shall eat food not unwarily and with-
out going right in amongst the bait that the deer-trapper has laid
down; by doing so we shall not become intoxicated; when we
are not intoxicated, we shall not fall into negligence; when we
are not negligent, the deer-trapper shall not do with us as he
likes on account of that bait.' And they did so.

"But then the deer-trapper and his following considered thus:
'These deer of this third herd are as cunning and crafty as wiz-
ards and sorcerers. They eat the bait laid down without our
knowing how they come and go. Suppose we have the bait that
is laid down completely surrounded all round over a wide area
with wicker hurdles; then perhaps we might see the third deer
herd's dwelling place, where they go to hide.' They did so, and
they saw the third herd's dwelling place, where they went to
hide. And that is how the deer of the third herd also failed to get
free from the deer-trapper's power and control.

6. "Now the deer of a fourth herd reckoned thus: 'The deer of
that first herd, by acting as they did without precaution, failed
to get free from the deer-trapper's power and control. The deer
of that second herd, by reckoning how the deer of the first herd
had failed and by planning and acting as they did with the pre-
caution of going to live in the forest wilds, also failed to get free
from the deer-trapper's power and control. And the deer of that
third herd, by reckoning how the deer of the first herd [154] and
also the deer of the second herd had failed, and by planning and
acting as they did with the precaution of making their dwelling


248 Nivapa Sutta: Sutta 25 i 156


place within range of the deer-trapper's bait, also failed to get
free from the deer-trapper's power and control. Suppose we make
our dwelling place where the deer-trapper and his following
cannot go. Then, having done so, we shall eat food not unwarily
and without going right in amongst the bait that the deer-trap-
per has laid down; by doing so we shall not become intoxicated;
when we are not intoxicated, we shall not fall into negligence;
when we are not negligent, [155] the deer-trapper shall not do
with us as he likes on account of that bait.' And they did so.

"But then the deer-trapper and his following considered thus:
'These deer of this fourth herd are as cunning and crafty as wiz-
ards and sorcerers. They eat the bait laid down without our
knowing how they come and go. Suppose we have the bait that
is laid down completely surrounded all round over a wide area
with wicker hurdles; then perhaps we might see the fourth deer
herd's dwelling place, where they go to hide.' They did so, but
they did not see the fourth deer herd's dwelling place, where they
went to hide. Then the deer-hunter and his following considered
thus: 'If we scare the fourth deer herd, being scared they will alert
others, and so the deer herds will all desert this bait that we have
laid down. Suppose we treat the fourth deer herd with indif-
ference.' They did so. And that was how the deer of the fourth
deer herd got free from the deer-trapper's power and control.

7. "Bhikkhus, I have given this simile in order to convey a
meaning. This is the meaning: 'Bait' is a term for the five cords
of sensual pleasure. 'Deer-trapper' is a term for Mara the Evil
One. 'The deer-trapper's following' is a term for Mara's follow-
ing. 'Deer herd' is a term for recluses and brahmins.

8. "Now recluses and brahmins of the first kind ate food
unwarily by going right in amongst the bait and the material
things of the world that Mara had laid down; [156] by so doing
they became intoxicated; when they were intoxicated, they fell
into negligence; when they were negligent, Mara did with them
as he liked on account of that bait and those material things of
the world. That is how the recluses and brahmins of the first kind
failed to get free from Mara's power and control. Those recluses
and brahmins, I say, are just like the deer of the first herd.

9. "Now recluses and brahmins of the second kind reckoned
thus: 'Those recluses and brahmins of the first kind, by acting as
they did without precaution, failed to get free from Mara's



power and control. Suppose we altogether shun that bait food
and those material things of the world; shunning that fearful
enjoyment, let us go out into the forest wilds and live there.'
And they did so. There they were eaters of greens or millet or
wild rice or hide-parings or moss or rice-bran or the discarded
scum of boiled rice or sesamum flour or grass or cowdung; they
lived on forest roots and fruits, they fed on fallen fruits.

"But in the last month of the hot season when the grass and
the water were used up, their bodies were reduced to extreme
emaciation; with that they lost their strength and energy; when
they had lost their strength and energy, they lost their deliver-
ance of mind; 293 with the loss of their deliverance of mind, they
returned to that same bait that Mara had laid down and those
material things of the world; they ate food unwarily by going
right in amongst it; by so doing they became intoxicated; when
they were intoxicated, they fell into negligence; when they were
negligent, Mara did with them as he liked on account of that
bait and those material things of the world. That is how those
recluses and brahmins of the second kind failed to get free from
Mara's power and control. [157] Those recluses and brahmins, I
say, are just like the deer of the second herd.

10. "Now recluses and brahmins of the third kind reckoned
thus: "Those recluses and brahmins of the first kind, by acting as
they did without precaution, failed to get free from Mara's
power and control. Those recluses and brahmins of the second
kind, by reckoning how the recluses and brahmins of the first
kind had failed, and then planning and acting as they did with
the precaution of going to live in the forest wilds, also failed to
get free from Mara's power and control. Suppose we make our
dwelling place within range of that bait that Mara has laid down
and those material things of the world. Then, having done so,
we shall eat food not unwarily and without going right in
amongst the bait that Mara has laid down and the material
things of the world. By doing so we shall not become intoxicated;
when we are not intoxicated, we shall not fall into negligence;
when we are not negligent, Mara shall not do with us as he likes
on account of that bait and those material things of the world.'
And they did so.

"But then they came to hold views such as 'the world is eter-
nal' and 'the world is not eternal' and 'the world is finite' and


250 Nivapa Sutta: Sutta 25


i 159


'the world is infinite' and 'the soul and the body are the same'
and 'the soul is one thing and the body another' and 'after
death a Tathagata exists' and 'after death a Tathagata does not
exist' and 'after death a Tathagata both exists and does not
exist' and 'after death a Tathagata neither exists nor does not
exist.' 294 [158] That is how those recluses and brahmins of the
third kind failed to get free from Mara's power and control.
Those recluses and brahmins, I say, are just like the deer of the
third herd.

11. "Now recluses and brahmins of the fourth kind reckoned
thus: 'Those recluses and brahmins of the first kind, by acting as
they did without precaution, failed to get free from Mara's
power and control. Those recluses and brahmins of the second
kind, by reckoning how the recluses and brahmins of the first
kind had failed, and by planning and acting as they did with the
precaution of going to live in the forest wilds, also failed to get
free from Mara's power and control. And the recluses and
brahmins of the third kind, by reckoning how the recluses and
brahmins of the first kind and also the recluses and brahmins of
the second kind had failed, and by planning and acting as they
did with the precaution of making their dwelling place within
range of the bait that Mara had laid down and the material
things of the world, also failed to get free from Mara's power
and control. Suppose we make our dwelling place where Mara
and his following cannot go. Then, having done so, we shall
eat food not unwarily and without going right in amongst the
bait that Mara has laid dbwn and the material things of the
world. By doing so we shall not become intoxicated; when we
are not intoxicated, we shall not fall into negligence; when we
are not negligent, Mara shall not do with us as he likes on
account of that bait and those material things of the world.' And
they did so. 1159] And that is how those recluses and brahmins
of the fourth kind got free from Mara's power and control.
Those recluses and brahmins, I say, are just like the deer of the
fourth herd.

12. "And where is it that Mara and his following cannot go?
Here, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the
first jhana, which is accompanied by applied and sustained
thought, with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion. This


I


The Bait 251


bhikkhu is said to have blindfolded Mara, to have become invisi-
ble to the Evil One by depriving Mara's eye of its opportunity. 295

13. "Again, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought,
a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second jhana, which
has self-confidence and singleness of mind without applied and
sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of concentra-
tion. This bhikkhu is said to have blindfolded Mara. . .

14. "Again, with the fading away as well of rapture, a bhikkhu
abides in equanimity, and mindful and fully aware, still feeling
pleasure with the body, he enters upon and abides in the third
jhana, on account of which the noble ones announce: 'He has a
pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.' This
bhikkhu is said to have blindfolded Mara. . .

15. "Again, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and
with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, a bhikkhu
enters upon and abides in the fourth jhana, which has neither-
pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.
This bhikkhu is said to have blindfolded Mara. . .

16. "Again, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of
form, with the disappearance of perceptions of sensory impact,
with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space
is infinite/ a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of infi-
nite space. This bhikkhu is said to have blindfolded Mara. . .

17. "Again, by completely surmounting the base of infinite
space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite,' a bhikkhu enters
upon and abides in the base of infinite consciousness. This
bhikkhu is said to have blindfolded Mara. . .

18. "Again, by completely surmounting the base of infinite
consciousness, [160] aware that 'there is nothing,' a bhikkhu
enters upon and abides in the base of nothingness. This bhikkhu
is said to have blindfolded Mara. . .

19. "Again, by completely surmounting the base of nothing-
ness, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of neither-
perception-nor-non-perception. This bhikkhu is said to have
blindfolded Mara, to have become invisible to the Evil One by
depriving Mara's eye of its opportunity.

20. "Again, by completely surmounting the base of neither-
perception-nor-non-perception, a bhikkhu enters upon and
abides in the cessation of perception and feeling. And his taints
are destroyed by his seeing with wisdom. This bhikkhu is said






252 Nivapa Sutta: Sutta 25


i 160


to have blindfolded Mara, to have become invisible to the Evil
One by depriving Mara's eye of its opportunity, and to have
crossed beyond attachment to the world." 296

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


26 Ariyapariyesana Sutta
The Noble Search


1. Thus have I heard. 297 On one occasion the Blessed One was
living at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.

2. Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One dressed, and
taking his bowl and outer robe, went into SavatthI for alms.
Then a number of bhikkhus went to the venerable Ananda and
said to him: "Friend Ananda, it is long since we heard a talk on
the Dhamma from the Blessed One's own lips. It would be good
if we could get to hear such a talk, friend Ananda." - "Then let
the venerable ones go to the brahmin Rammaka's hermitage.
Perhaps you will get to hear a talk on the Dhamma from the
Blessed One's own lips." - "Yes, friend," they replied.

3. Then, when the Blessed One had wandered for alms in
SavatthI and had returned from his almsround, after his meal he
addressed the venerable Ananda: "Ananda, let us go to the
Eastern Park, to the Palace of Migara's Mother, for the day's
abiding." - "Yes, venerable sir," the venerable Ananda
replied. [161] Then the Blessed One went with the venerable
Ananda to the Eastern Park, the Palace of Migara's Mother, for
the day's abiding.

Then, when it was evening, the Blessed One rose from medita-
tion and addressed the venerable Ananda: "Ananda, let us go to
the Eastern Bathing Place to bathe." - "Yes, venerable sir," the
venerable Ananda replied. Then the Blessed One went with the
venerable Ananda to the Eastern Bathing Place to bathe. When
he was finished, he came up out of the water and stood in one
robe drying his limbs. Then the venerable Ananda said to the
Blessed One: "Venerable sir, the brahmin Rammaka's hermitage
is nearby. That hermitage is agreeable and delightful. Venerable
sir, it would be good if the Blessed One went there out of com-
passion." The Blessed One consented in silence.


253


i 162


I

I

254 Anyapariyesana Sutta: Sutta 26


4. Then the Blessed One went to the brahmin Rammaka's her-
mitage. Now on that occasion a number of bhikkhus were sit-
ting together in the hermitage discussing the Dhamma. The
Blessed One stood outside the door waiting for their discussion
to end. When he knew that it was over, he coughed and
knocked, and the bhikkhus opened the door for him. The
Blessed One entered, sat down on a seat made ready, and
addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus, for what discussion
are you sitting together here now? And what was your discus-
sion that was interrupted?"

"Venerable sir, our discussion on the Dhamma that was inter-
rupted was about the Blessed One himself. Then the Blessed
One arrived."

"Good, bhikkhus. It is fitting for you clansmen who have gone
forth out of faith from the home life into homelessness to sit
together to discuss the Dhamma. When you gather together,
bhikkhus, you should do either of two things: hold discussion
on the Dhamma or maintain noble silence. 298


(two kinds of search)


5. "Bhikkhus, there are these two kinds of search: the noble
search and the ignoble search. And what is the ignoble search?
Here someone being himself subject to birth seeks what is also
subject to birth; being himself subject to ageing, [162] he seeks
what is also subject to agging; being himself subject to sickness,
he seeks what is also subject to sickness; being himself subject to
death, he seeks what is also subject to death; being himself sub-
ject to sorrow, he seeks what is also subject to sorrow; being
himself subject to defilement, he seeks what is also subject to
defilement.

6. "And what may be said to be subject to birth? Wife and chil-
dren are subject to birth, men and women slaves, goats and
sheep, fowl and pigs, elephants, cattle, horses, and mares, gold
and silver are subject to birth. These objects of attachment 299 are
subject to birth; and one who is tied to these things, infatuated
with them, and utterly committed to them, being himself subject
to birth, seeks what it also subject to birth.

7. "And what may be said to be subject to ageing? Wife and
children are subject to ageing, men and women slaves, goats



The Noble Search 255


i 163


and sheep, fowl and pigs, elephants, cattle, horses, and mares,
gold and silver are subject to ageing. These objects of attachment
are subject to ageing; and one who is tied to these things, infatu-
ated with them, and utterly committed to them, being himself
subject to ageing, seeks what is also subject to ageing.

8. "And what may be said to be subject to sickness? Wife and
children are subject to sickness, men and women slaves, goats
and sheep, fowl and pigs, elephants, cattle, horses, and mares
are subject to sickness. These objects of attachment are subject to
sickness; and one who is tied to these things, infatuated with
them, and utterly committed to them, being himself subject to
sickness, seeks what is also subject to sickness. 300

9. "And what may be said to be subject to death? Wife and
children are subject to death, men and women slaves, goats and
sheep, fowl and pigs, elephants, cattle, horses, and mares are
subject to death. These objects of attachment are subject to
death; and one who is tied to these things, infatuated with them,
and utterly committed to them, being himself subject to death,
seeks what is also subject to death.

10. "And what may be said to be subject to sorrow? Wife and
children are subject to sorrow, men and women slaves, goats
and sheep, fowl and pigs, elephants, cattle, horses, and mares
are subject to sorrow. These objects of attachment are subject to
sorrow; and one who is tied to these things, infatuated with
them, and utterly committed to them, being himself subject to
sorrow, seeks what is also subject to sorrow.

11. "And what may be said to be subject to defilement? Wife
and children are subject to defilement, men and women slaves,
goats and sheep, fowl and pigs, elephants, cattle, horses, and
mares, gold and silver are subject to defilement. These objects of
attachment are subject to defilement; and one who is tied to
these things, infatuated with them, and utterly committed to
them, being himself subject to defilement, seeks what is also
subject to defilement. This is the ignoble search.

12. "And what is the noble search? Here someone being him-
self subject to birth, having understood the danger in what is
subject to birth, [163] seeks the unborn supreme security from
bondage, Nibbana; being himself subject to ageing, having
understood the danger in what is subject to ageing, he seeks
the unageing supreme security from bondage, Nibbana; being


256 Ariyapariyesana Sutta: Sutta 26


i 163


himself subject to sickness, having understood the danger in what
is subject to sickness, he seeks the unailing supreme security
from bondage, Nibbana; being himself subject to death, having
understood the danger in what is subject to death, he seeks the
deathless supreme security from bondage, Nibbana; being him-
self subject to sorrow, having understood the danger in what is
subject to sorrow, he seeks the sorrowless supreme security
from bondage, Nibbana; being himself subject to defilement,
having understood the danger in what is subject to defilement,
he seeks the undefiled supreme security from bondage,
Nibbana. This is the noble search.

(the search for enlightenment)

13. "Bhikkhus, before my enlightenment, while I was still only
an unenlightened Bodhisatta, I too, being myself subject to birth,
sought what was also subject to birth; being myself subject to
ageing, sickness, death, sorrow, and defilement, I sought what
was also subject to ageing, sickness, death, sorrow, and defile-
ment. Then I considered thus: 'Why, being myself subject to
birth, do I seek what is also subject to birth? Why, being myself
subject to ageing, sickness, death, sorrow, and defilement, do I
seek what is also subject to ageing, sickness, death, sorrow, and
defilement? Suppose that, being myself subject to birth, having
understood the danger in what is subject to birth, I seek the
unborn supreme security from bondage, Nibbana. Suppose that,
being myself subject to ageing, sickness, death, sorrow, and
defilement, having understood the danger in what is subject to
ageing, sickness, death, sorrow, and defilement, I seek the
unageing, unailing, deathless, sorrowless, and undefiled
supreme security from bondage, Nibbana.'

14. "Later, while still young, a black-haired young man
endowed with the blessing of youth, in the prime of life, though
my mother and father wished otherwise and wept with tearful
faces, I shaved off my hair and beard, put on the yellow robe,
and went forth from the home life into homelessness.

15. "Having gone forth, bhikkhus, in search of what is whole-
some, seeking the supreme state of sublime peace, I went to
Alara Kalama and said to him: 'Friend Kalama, I want to lead
the holy life in this Dhamma and Discipline.' Alara Kalama



i 165


The Noble Search 257


re plied: 'The venerable one may stay here. This Dhamma is
g uch that a wise man [164J can soon enter upon and abide in it,
realising for himself through direct knowledge his own
teacher's doctrine.' I soon quickly learned that Dhamma. As far
aS mere lip-reciting and rehearsal of his teaching went, I could
speak with knowledge and assurance, and I claimed, 'I know
and see' - and there were others who did likewise.

"I considered: 'It is not through mere faith alone that Alara
Kalama declares: "By realising for myself with direct knowl-
edge, I enter upon and abide in this Dhamma." Certainly Alara
Kalama abides knowing and seeing this Dhamma.' Then I went
to Alara Kalama and asked him: 'Friend Kalama, in what way
do you declare that by realising for yourself with direct knowl-
edge you enter upon and abide in this Dhamma?' In reply he
declared the base of nothingness. 301

"I considered: 'Not only Alara Kalama has faith, energy,
mindfulness, concentration, and wisdom. I too have faith, ener-
gy, mindfulness, concentration, and wisdom. Suppose I
endeavour to realise the Dhamma that Alara Kalama declares
he enters upon and abides in by realising for himself with
direct knowledge?'

"I soon quickly entered upon and abided in that Dhamma by
realising for myself with direct knowledge. Then I went to Alara
Kalama and asked him: 'Friend Kalama, is it in this way that
you declare that you enter upon and abide in this Dhamma by
realising for yourself with direct knowledge?' - 'That is the way,
friend.' - 'It is in this way, friend, that I also enter upon and
abide in this Dhamma by realising for myself with direct knowl-
edge.’ - 'It is a gain for us, friend, it is a great gain for us that we
have such a venerable one for our companion in the holy life. So
the Dhamma that I declare I enter upon and abide in by realis-
ing for myself with direct knowledge is the Dhamma that you
enter upon and abide in by realising for yourself with direct
knowledge. [165] And the Dhamma that you enter upon and
abide in by realising for yourself with direct knowledge is the
Dhamma that I declare I enter upon and abide in by realising for
myself with direct knowledge. So you know the Dhamma that I
know and I know the Dhamma that you know. As I am, so are
you; as you are, so am I. Come, friend, let us now lead this com-
munity together.'


258 Ariyapariyesana Sutta: Sutta 26


i 166


"Thus Alara Kalama, my teacher, placed me, his pupil, on an
equal footing with himself and awarded me the highest honour.
But it occurred to me: "This Dhamma does not lead to disen-
chantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowl-
edge, to enlightenment, to Nibbana, but only to reappearance in
the base of nothingness.' 302 Not being satisfied with that
Dhamma, I left it and went away.

16. "Still in search, bhikkhus, of what is wholesome, seeking
the supreme state of sublime peace, I went to Uddaka Ramaputta
and said to him: 'Friend, I want to lead the holy life in this
Dhamma and Discipline.' 303 Uddaka Ramaputta replied: 'The
venerable one may stay here. This Dhamma is such that a wise
man can soon enter upon and abide in it, himself realising
through direct knowledge his own teacher's doctrine.' I soon
quickly learned that Dhamma. As far as mere lip-reciting and
rehearsal of his teaching went, I could speak with knowledge
and assurance, and I claimed, 'I know and see' - and there were
others who did likewise.

"I considered: 'It was not through mere faith alone that Rama
declared: "By realising for myself with direct knowledge, I enter
upon and abide in this Dhamma." Certainly Rama abided know-
ing and seeing this Dhamma.' Then I went to Uddaka Ramaputta
and asked him: 'Friend, in what way did Rama declare that by
realising for himself with direct knowledge he entered upon and
abided in this Dhamma?' In reply Uddaka Ramaputta declared
the base of neither-percej5tion-nor-non-perception.

"I considered: 'Not only Rama had faith, [166] energy, mind-
fulness, concentration, and wisdom. I too have faith, energy,
mindfulness, concentration, and wisdom. Suppose I endeavour
to realise the Dhamma that Rama declared he entered upon and
abided in by realising for himself with direct knowledge.'

"I soon quickly entered upon and abided in that Dhamma by
realising for myself with direct knowledge. Then I went to
Uddaka Ramaputta and asked him: 'Friend, was it in this way
that Rama declared that he entered upon and abided in this
Dhamma by realising for himself with direct knowledge?' -
'That is the way, friend.' - 'It is in this way, friend, that I also
enter upon and abide in this Dhamma by realising for myself
with direct knowledge.' - 'It is a gain for us, friend, it is a great
gain for us that we have such a venerable one for our companion



The Noble Search 259



in the holy life. So the Dhamma that Rama declared he entered
upon and abided in by realising for himself with direct knowl-
edge is the Dhamma that you enter upon and abide in by realis-
ing for yourself with direct knowledge. And the Dhamma that
you enter upon and abide in by realising for yourself with direct
knowledge is the Dhamma that Rama declared he entered upon
and abided in by realising for himself with direct knowledge. So
you know the Dhamma that Rama knew and Rama knew the
Dhamma that you know. As Rama was, so are you; as you are,
so was Rama. Come, friend, now lead this community.'

"Thus Uddaka Ramaputta, my companion in the holy life,
placed me in the position of a teacher and accorded me the high-
est honour. But it occurred to me: 'This Dhamma does not lead
to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct j

knowledge, to enlightenment, to Nibbana, but only to reappear-
ance in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.' Not j

being satisfied with that Dhamma, I left it and went away.

17. "Still in search, bhikkhus, of what is wholesome, seeking 0
the supreme state of sublime peace, I wandered by stages / A
through the Magadhan country until eventually I arrived at i
Senanigama near Uruvela. [167] There I saw an agreeable piece
of ground, a delightful grove with a clear-flowing river with j
pleasant, smooth banks and nearby a village for alms resort. I ,
considered: 'This is an agreeable piece of ground, this is a ! j

delightful grove with a clear^flowing river with pleasant, ■
smooth banks and nearby a village for alms resort. This will j j

serve for the striving of a clansman intent on striving.' And I sat j

down there thinking: 'This will serve for striving.' 304 >

(enlightenment)



18. "Then, bhikkhus, being myself subject to birth, having
understood the danger in what is subject to birth, seeking the
unborn supreme security from bondage, Nibbana, I attained the
unborn supreme security from bondage, Nibbana; being myself
subject to ageing, having understood the danger in what is sub-
ject to ageing, seeking the unageing supreme security from
bondage, Nibbana, I attained the-unageing supreme security
from bondage, Nibbana; being myself subject to sickness, having
understood the danger in what is subject to sickness, seeking the


i 168


260 A riyapa riyesa n a Sutta: Sutta 26


unailing supreme security from bondage, Nibbana, I attained
the unailing supreme security from bondage, Nibbana; being
myself subject to death, having understood the danger in what
is subject to death, seeking the deathless supreme security from
bondage, Nibbana, I attained the deathless supreme security
from bondage, Nibbana; being myself subject to sorrow, having
understood the danger in what is subject to sorrow, seeking the
sorrowless supreme security from bondage, Nibbana, I attained
the sorrowless supreme security from bondage, Nibbana; being
myself subject to defilement, having understood the danger in
what is subject to defilement, seeking the undefiled supreme
security from bondage, Nibbana, I attained the undefiled
supreme security from bondage, Nibbana. The knowledge and
vision arose in me: 'My deliverance is unshakeable; this is my
last birth; now there is no renewal of being.'

19. "I considered: 'This Dhamma that I have attained is pro-
found, hard to see and hard to understand, peaceful and sublime,
unattainable by mere reasoning, subtle, to be experienced by the
wise. 305 But this generation delights in worldliness, takes delight
in worldliness, rejoices in worldliness. 306 It is hard for such a gen-
eration to see this truth, namely, specific conditionality, dependent
origination. And it is hard to see this truth, namely, the stilling of
all formations, the relinquishing of all attachments, the destruc-
tion of craving, dispassion, cessation, Nibbana. [168] If I were to
teach the Dhamma, others would not understand me, and that
would be wearying and* troublesome for me.' Thereupon there
came to me spontaneously these stanzas never heard before:

'Enough with teaching the Dhamma
That even I found hard to reach;

For it will never be perceived
By those who live in lust and hate.

Those dyed in lust, wrapped in darkness
Will never discern this abstruse Dhamma
Which goes against the worldly stream.

Subtle, deep, and difficult to see.'

Considering thus, my mind inclined to inaction rather than to
teaching the Dhamma. 307


The Noble Search 261


20. "Then, bhikkhus, the Brahma Sahampati knew with his
mind the thought in my mind and he considered: "The world will
be lost, the world will perish, since the mind of the Tathagata,
accomplished and fully enlightened, inclines to inaction rather
than to teaching the Dhamma/ Then, just as quickly as a strong
man might extend his flexed arm or flex his extended arm, the
Brahma Sahampati vanished in the Brahma-world and appeared
before me. He arranged his upper robe on one shoulder, and
extending his hands in reverential salutation towards me, said:
'Venerable sir, let the Blessed One teach the Dhamma, let the
Sublime One teach the Dhamma. There are beings with little dust
in their eyes who are wasting through not hearing the Dhamma.
There will be those who will understand the Dhamma.' The
Brahma Sahampati spoke thus, and then he said further:

'In Magadha there have appeared till now
Impure teachings devised by those still stained.

Open the doors to the Deathless! Let them hear
The Dhamma that the Stainless One has found .


Just as one who stands on a mountain peak
Can see below the people all around.

So, O Wise One, All-seeing Sage,

Ascend the palace of the Dhamma.

Let the Sorrowless One survey this human breed.
Engulfed in sorrow, overcome by birth and old age. [169]


Arise, victorious hero, caravan leader.
Debtless one, and wander in the world.
Let the Blessed One teach the Dhamma,
There will be those who will understand.'



21. "Then I listened to the Brahma's pleading, and out of com-
passion for beings I surveyed the world with the eye of a
Buddha. Surveying the world with the eye of a Buddha, I saw
beings with little dust in their eyes and with much dust in their
eyes, with keen faculties and with dull faculties, with good qual-
ities and with bad qualities, easy to teach and hard to teach, and
some who dwelt seeing fear in blame and in the other world.
Just as in a pond of blue or red or white lotuses, some lotuses


262 Ariyapariyesana Sutta: Sutta 26


i 170


that are born and grow in the water thrive immersed in the
water without rising out of it, and some other lotuses that are
born and grow in the water rest on the water's surface, and
some other lotuses that are bom and grow in the water rise out
of the water and stand clear, unwetted by it; so too, surveying
the world with the eye of a Buddha, I saw beings with little dust
in their eyes and with much dust in their eyes, with keen facul-
ties and with dull faculties, with good qualities and with bad
qualities, easy to teach and hard to teach, and some who dwelt
seeing fear in blame and in the other world. Then I replied to the
Brahma Sahampati in stanzas:

'Open for them are the doors to the Deathless,

Let those with ears now show their faith.

Thinking it would be troublesome, O Brahma,

I did not speak the Dhamma subtle and sublime.'

Then the Brahma Sahampati thought: 'I have created the
opportunity for the Blessed One to teach the Dhamma.' And
after paying homage to me, keeping me on the right, he there-
upon departed at once.

22. "I considered thus: 'To whom should I first teach the
Dhamma? Who will understand this Dhamma quickly?' It then
occurred to me: 'Alara Kalama is wise, intelligent, and discern-
ing; he has long had little dust in his eyes. Suppose I [170]
taught the Dhamma first’to Alara Kalama. He will understand it
quickly.' Then deities approached me and said: 'Venerable sir,
Alara Kalama died seven days ago.' And the knowledge and
vision arose in me: 'Alara Kalama died seven days ago.' I
thought: 'Alara Kalama 's loss is a great one. If he had heard this
Dhamma, he would have understood it quickly.'

23. "I considered thus: 'To whom should I first teach the
Dhamma? Who will understand this Dhamma quickly?' It then
occurred to me: 'Uddaka Ramaputta is wise, intelligent, and dis-
cerning; he has long had little dust in his eyes. Suppose I taught
the Dhamma first to Uddaka Ramaputta. He will understand it
quickly.' Then deities approached me and said: 'Venerable sir,
Uddaka Ramaputta died last night.' And the knowledge and
vision arose in me: 'Uddaka Ramaputta died last night.' I
thought: 'Uddaka Ramaputta's loss is a great one. If he had
heard this Dhamma, he would have understood it quickly.'


E-



j YJ\ The Noble Search 263


24. "I considered thus: 'To whom should I first teach the
Dhamma? Who will understand this Dhamma quickly?' It then
occurred to me: 'The bhikkhus of the group of five who attended
upon me while I was engaged in my striving were very help-
ful- 308 Suppose I taught the Dhamma first to them.' Then I
thought: 'Where are the bhikkhus of the group of five now liv-
ing?' And with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses
the human, I saw that they were living at Benares in the Deer
Park at Isipatana.


(the teaching of the dhamma)

25. "Then, bhikkhus, when I had stayed at Uruvela as long as I
chose, I set out to wander by stages to Benares. Between Gaya
and the Place of Enlightenment the Ajlvaka Upaka saw me on
the road and said: 'Friend, your faculties are clear, the colour of
your skin is pure and bright. Under whom have you gone forth,
friend? Who is your teacher? Whose Dhamma do you [171] pro-
fess?' I replied to the Ajlvaka Upaka in stanzas:


'I am one who has transcended all, a knower of all.
Unsullied among all things, renouncing all.

By craving's ceasing freed. Having known this all
For myself, to whom should I point as teacher?

I have no teacher, and one like me
Exists nowhere in all the world
With all its gods, because I have
No person for my counterpart.

I am the Accomplished One in the world,

I am the Teacher Supreme.

I alone am a Fully Enlightened One
Whose fires are quenched and extinguished.

I go now to the city of Kasi

To set in motion the Wheel of Dhamma.

In a world that has become blind
I go to beat the drum of the Deathless.'


'By your claims, friend, you ought to be the Universal Victor.' 309


264 Ariyayariyesatia Sutta: Sutta 26


i 172


'The victors are those like me

Who have won to destruction of taints.

I have vanquished all evil states.

Therefore, Upaka, I am a victor.'

"When this was said, the Ajlvaka Upaka said: 'May it be so,
friend.' Shaking his head, he took a bypath and departed. 310

26. "Then, bhikkhus, wandering by stages, I eventually came
to Benares, to the Deer Park at Isipatana, and I approached the
bhikkhus of the group of five. The bhikkhus saw me coming in
the distance, and they agreed among themselves thus: 'Friends,
here comes the recluse Gotama who lives luxuriously, who gave
up his striving, and reverted to luxury. We should not pay
homage to him or rise up for him or receive his bowl and outer
robe. But a seat may be prepared for him. If he likes, he may sit
down.' However, as 1 approached, those bhikkhus found them-
selves unable to keep their pact. One came to meet me and took
my bowl and outer robe, another prepared a seat, and another
set out water for my feet; however, they addressed me by name
and as 'friend.' 311

27. "Thereupon I told them: 'Bhikkhus, do not address the
Tathagata by name and as "friend." The Tathagata is an
Accomplished One, [172] a Fully Enlightened One. Listen,
bhikkhus, the Deathless has been attained. I shall instruct you, I
shall teach you the Dhamma. Practising as you are instructed,
by realising for yourselves here and now through direct knowl-
edge you will soon enter upon and abide in that supreme goal of
the holy life for the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth
from the home life into homelessness.'

"When this was said, the bhikkhus of the group of five
answered me thus: 'Friend Gotama, by the conduct, the practice,
and the performance of austerities that you undertook, you did
not achieve any superhuman states, any distinction in knowl-
edge and vision worthy of the noble ones. 312 Since you now live
luxuriously, having given up your striving and reverted to luxu-
ry, how will you have achieved any superhuman states, any dis-
tinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones?'
When this was said, I told them: 'The Tathagata does not live
luxuriously, nor has he given up his striving and reverted to


The Noble Search 265


il73

luxury. The Tathagat a is an Accomplished One, a Fully
j 7 n ljghtened One. Listen, bhikkhus, the Deathless has been
attained... from the home life into homelessness.'

"A second time the bhikkhus of the group of five said to me:
'Friend Gotama...how will you have achieved any super-
human states, any distinction in knowledge and vision worthy
of the noble ones?' A second time I told them: 'The Tathagata
does not live luxuriously... from the home life into homeless-
ness.' A third time the bhikkhus of the group of five said to me:
'Friend Gotama...how will you have achieved any superhuman
states, any distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the
noble ones?'

28. "When this was said I asked them: 'Bhikkhus, have you
ever known me to speak like this before?' - 'No, venerable
sir.' 313 - 'Bhikkhus, the Tathagata is an Accomplished One, a
Fully Enlightened One. Listen, bhikkhus, the Deathless has
been attained. I shall instruct you, I shall teach you the
Dhamma. Practising as you are instructed, by realising for your-
selves here and now through direct knowledge you will soon
enter upon and abide in that supreme goal of the holy life for
the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth from the home life
into homelessness.' [173]

29. "I was able to convince the bhikkhus of the group of
five. 314 Then I sometimes instructed two bhikkhus while the
other three went for alms, and the six of us lived on what those
three bhikkhus brought back from their almsround. Sometimes I
instructed three bhikkhus while the other two went for alms,
and the six of us lived on what those two bhikkhus brought
back from their almsround.

30. "Then the bhikkhus of the group of five, thus taught and
instructed by me, being themselves subject to birth, having
understood the danger in what is subject to birth, seeking the
unborn supreme security from bondage, Nibbana, attained the
unborn supreme security from bondage, Nibbana; being them-
selves subject to ageing, sickness, death, sorrow, and defilement,
having understood the danger in what is subject to ageing, sick-
ness, death, sorrow, and defilement, seeking the unageing,
unailing, deathless, sorrowless, and undefiled supreme security
from bondage, Nibbana, they attained the unageing, unailing,
deathless, sorrowless, and undefiled supreme security from


266 Ariyapariyesana Sutta: Sutta 26


i 174


I bondage, Nibbana. The knowledge and vision arose in them:

' 'Our deliverance is unshakeable; this is our last birth; there is no

| renewal of being.'

I

(SENSUAL PLEASURE)

31. "Bhikkhus, there are these five cords of sensual pleasure. 315
What are the five? Forms cognizable by the eye that are wished
for, desired, agreeable and likeable, connected with sensual
desire, and provocative of lust. Sounds cognizable by the
ear... Odours cognizable by the nose... Flavours cognizable by
the tongue... Tangibles cognizable by the body that are wished
for, desired, agreeable and likeable, connected with sensual
desire, and provocative of lust. These are the five cords of sen-
sual pleasure.

32. "As to those recluses and brahmins who are tied to these
five cords of sensual pleasure, infatuated with them and utterly
committed to them, and who use them without seeing the dan-
ger in them or understanding the escape from them, it may be
understood of them: 'They have met with calamity, met with
disaster, the Evil One may do with them as he likes.' Suppose a
forest deer who was bound lay down on a heap of snares; it
might be understood of him: 'He has met with calamity, met
with disaster, the hunter can do with him as he likes, and when
the hunter comes he cannot go where he wants.' So too, as to
those recluses and brahmins who are tied to these five cords of
sensual pleasure... it may be understood of them: 'They have
met with calamity, met with disaster, the Evil One may do with
them as he likes.'

33. "As to those recluses and brahmins who are not tied to
these five cords of sensual pleasure, who are not infatuated with
them or utterly committed to them, and who use them seeing
the danger in them and understanding the escape from them,
[174] it may be understood of them: 'They have not met with
calamity, not met with disaster, the Evil One cannot do with
them as he likes.' 316 Suppose a forest deer who was unbound lay
down on a heap of snares; it might be understood of him: 'He has
not met with calamity, not met with disaster, the hunter cannot
do with him as he likes, and when the hunter comes he can go
where he wants.' So too, as to those recluses and brahmins who



The Noble Search 267


i 174

ar e not tied to these five cords of sensual pleasure... it may be
understood of them: 'They have not met with calamity, not met
with disaster, the Evil One cannot do with them as he likes.'

34. "Suppose a forest deer is wandering in the forest wilds:
he walks without fear, stands without fear, sits without fear,
lies down without fear. Why is that? Because he is out of the
hunter's range. So too, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and
abides in the first jhana, which is accompanied by applied and
sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of seclu-
sion. This bhikkhu is said to have blindfolded Mara, to have
become invisible to the Evil One by depriving Mara's eye of its
opportunity. 317

35. "Again, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought,
a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second jhana, which
has self-confidence and singleness of mind without applied and
sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of concentra-
tion. This bhikkhu is said to have blindfolded Mara. . .

36. "Again, with the fading away as well of rapture, a bhikkhu
abides in equanimity, and mindful and fully aware, still feeling
pleasure with the body, he enters upon and abides in the third
jhana, on account of which noble ones announce: 'He has a
pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.' This
bhikkhu is said to have blindfolded Mara. . .

37. "Again, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and
with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, a bhikkhu
enters upon and abides in the fourth jhana, which has neither-
pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.
This bhikkhu is said to have blindfolded Mara. . .

38. "Again, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of
form, with the disappearance of perceptions of sensory impact,
with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space
is infinite,' a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of infi-
nite space. This bhikkhu is said to have blindfolded Mara. . .

39. "Again, by completely surmounting the base of infinite
space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite,' a bhikkhu enters
upon and abides in the base of infinite consciousness. This
bhikkhu is said to have blindfolded Mara. . .

40. "Again, by completely surmounting the base of infinite
consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing,' a bhikkhu enters


268 Ariyapariyesana Sutta: Sutta 26


i 175


upon and abides in the base of nothingness. This bhikkhu is said
to have blindfolded Mara...

41. "Again, by completely surrounding the base of nothingness,
[175] a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of neither-
perception-nor-non-perception. This bhikkhu is said to have
blindfolded Mara, to have become invisible to the Evil One by
depriving Mara's eye of its opportunity.

42. "Again, by completely surmounting the base of neither-
perception-nor-non-perception, a bhikkhu enters upon and
abides in the cessation of perception and feeling. And his taints
are destroyed by his seeing with wisdom. This bhikkhu is said
to have blindfolded Mara, to have become invisible to the Evil
One by depriving Mara's eye of its opportunity, and to have
crossed beyond attachment to the world. 318 He walks without
fear, stands without fear, sits without fear, lies down without
fear. Why is that? Because he is out of the Evil One's range."

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


27 Culahatthipadopama Sutta
The Shorter Discourse on the Simile
of the Elephant's Footprint


1. Thus have I heard. 319 On one occasion the Blessed One was
living at Savatth! in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.

2. Now on that occasion the brahmin Janussoni was driving
out of Savatth! in the middle of the day in an all-white chariot
drawn by white mares. He saw the wanderer Pilotika coming in
the distance and asked him: "Now where is Master Vacchayana
coming from in the middle of the day?" 320

"Sir, I am coming from the presence of the recluse Gotama."

"What does Master Vacchayana think of the recluse Gotama's
lucidity of wisdom? He is wise, is he not?"

"Sir, who am I to know the recluse Gotama's lucidity of wis-
dom? One would surely have to be his equal to know the
recluse Gotama's lucidity of wisdom."

"Master Vacchayana praises the recluse Gotama with high
praise indeed."

"Sir, who am I to praise the recluse Gotama? The recluse
Gotama is praised by the praised as best among gods and
humans."

"What reasons does Master Vacchayana see that he has such
confidence in the recluse Gotama?"

3. "Sir, suppose a wise elephant woodsman were to enter an
elephant wood and were to see in the elephant wood [176] a big
elephant's footprint, long in extent and broad across. He would
come to the conclusion: 'Indeed, this is a big bull elephant.' So
too, when I saw four footprints of the recluse Gotama, I came to
the conclusion: 'The Blessed One is fully enlightened, the
Dhamma is well proclaimed by the Blessed One, the Sangha is
practising the good way.' What are the four?

4. "Sir, I have seen here certain learned nobles who were
clever, knowledgeable about the doctrines of others, as sharp as


269


270 Culahatthipadopama Sutta: Sutta 27


i 177


hairsplitting marksmen; they wander about, as it were, demol-
ishing the views of others with their sharp wits. When they
hear: 'The recluse Gotama will visit such and such a village or
town/ they formulate a question thus: 'We will go to the recluse
Gotama and ask him this question. If he is asked like this, he
will answer like this, and so we will refute his doctrine in this
way; and if he is asked like that, he will answer like that, and so
we will refute his doctrine in that way.'

"They hear: 'Tire recluse Gotama has come to visit such and
such a village or town.' They go to the recluse Gotama, and the
recluse Gotama instructs, urges, rouses, and encourages them
with a talk on the Dhamma. After they have been instructed,
urged, roused, and encouraged by the recluse Gotama with a
talk on the Dhamma, they do not so much as ask him the ques-
tion, so how should they refute his doctrine? In actual fact, they
become his disciples. When I saw this first footprint of the
recluse Gotama, I came to the conclusion: 'The Blessed One is
fully enlightened, the Dhamma is well proclaimed by the
Blessed One, the Sangha is practising the good way.'

5. "Again, I have seen certain learned brahmins who were
clever. . .In actual fact, they too become his disciples. When I saw
this second footprint of the recluse Gotama, I came to the con-
clusion: 'The Blessed One is fully enlightened. . .'

6. "Again, I have seen certain learned householders who were
clever. ..[177]. ..In actual fact, they too become his disciples.
When I saw this third footprint of the recluse Gotama, I came to
the conclusion: 'The Blessed One is fully enlightened. . .'

7. "Again, I have seen certain learned recluses who were
clever. . .They do not so much as ask him the question, so how
should they refute his doctrine? In actual fact, they ask the
recluse Gotama to allow them to go forth from the home life into
homelessness, and he gives them the going forth. Not long after
they have gone forth, dwelling alone, withdrawn, diligent,
ardent, and resolute, by realising for themselves with direct
knowledge they here and now enter upon and abide in that
supreme goal of the holy life for the sake of which clansmen
rightly go forth from the home life into homelessness. They say
thus: 'We were very nearly lost, we very nearly perished, for
formerly we claimed that we were recluses though we were not


i 178


The Simile of the Elephant’s Footprint (Shorter) 271


really recluses; we claimed that we were brahmins through we
vvere not really brahmins; we claimed that we were arahants
though we were not really arahants. But now we are recluses,
n0 w we are brahmins, now we are arahants.' When I saw this
fourth footprint of the recluse Gotama, I came to the conclusion:
'The Blessed One is fully enlightened...'

"When I saw these four footprints of the recluse Gotama, I
came to the conclusion: 'The Blessed One is fully enlightened,
the Dhamma is well proclaimed by the Blessed One, the Sangha
is practising the good way.'"

8. When this was said, the brahmin Janussoni got down from
his all-white chariot drawn by white mares, and arranging his
upper robe on one shoulder, he extended his hands in reverential
salutation towards the Blessed One and uttered this exclamation
three times: "Honour to the Blessed One, accomplished and fully
enlightened! Honour to the Blessed One, accomplished and fully
enlightened! Honour to the Blessed One, accomplished and fully
enlightened! Perhaps some time or other [178] we might meet
Master Gotama and have some conversation with him."

9. Then the brahmin Janussoni went to the Blessed One and
exchanged greetings with him. When this courteous and ami-
able talk was finished, he sat down at one side and related to the
Blessed One his entire conversation with the wanderer Pilotika.
Thereupon the Blessed One told him: "At this point, brahmin,
the simile of the elephant's footprint has not yet been completed
in detail. As to how it is completed in detail, listen and attend
carefully to what I shall say." - "Yes, sir," the brahmin Janussoni
replied. The Blessed One said this:

10. "Brahmin, suppose an elephant woodsman were to enter
an elephant wood and were to see in the elephant wood a big
elephant's footprint, long in extent and broad across. A wise ele-
phant woodsman would not yet come to the conclusion:
'Indeed, this is a big bull elephant.' Why is that? In an elephant
wood there are small she-elephants that leave a big footprint,
and this might be one of their footprints. He follows it and sees
in the elephant wood a big elephant's footprint, long in extent
and broad across, and some scrapings high up. A wise elephant
woodsman would not yet come to the conclusion: 'Indeed, this
is a big bull elephant.' Why is that? In an elephant wood there


272 Culahatthipadopama Sutta: Sutta 27


i 179


are tall she-elephants that have prominent teeth and leave a big
footprint, and this might be one of their footprints. He follows it
further and sees in the elephant wood a big elephant's footprint,
long in extent and broad across, and some scrapings high up,
and marks made by tusks. A wise elephant woodsman would
not yet come to the conclusion: 'Indeed, this is a big bull ele-
phant.' Why is that? In an elephant wood there are tall she-
elephants that have tusks and leave a big footprint, and this
might be one of their footprints. He follows it further and sees in
the elephant wood a big elephant's footprint, long in extent and
broad across, and some scrapings high up, and marks made by
tusks, and broken-off branches. And he sees that bull elephant
at the root of a tree or in the open, walking about, sitting, or
lying down. He comes to the conclusion: 'This is that big bull
elephant.'

11. "So too, [179] brahmin, here a Tathagata appears in the
world, accomplished, fully enlightened, perfect in true knowl-
edge and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable
leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans,
enlightened, blessed. He declares this world with its gods, its
Maras, and its Brahmas, this generation with its recluses and
brahmins, its princes and its people, which he has himself
realised with direct knowledge. He teaches the Dhamma good
in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, with
the right meaning and phrasing, and he reveals a holy life that is
utterly perfect and pure.

12. "A householder or, householder's son or one born in some
other clan hears that Dhamma. On hearing the Dhamma he
acquires faith in the Tathagata. Possessing that faith, he consid-
ers thus: 'Household life is crowded and dusty; life gone forth is
wide open. It is not easy, while living in a home, to lead the holy
life utterly perfect and pure as a polished shell. Suppose I shave
off my hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from
the home life into homelessness.' On a later occasion, abandon-
ing a small or a large fortune, abandoning a small or a large cir-
cle of relatives, he shaves off his hair and beard, puts on the yel-
low robe, and goes forth from the home life into homelessness.

13. "Having thus gone forth and possessing the bhikkhu's
training and way of life, abandoning the killing of living beings,
he abstains from killing living beings; with rod and weapon laid


aside, gentle and kindly, he abides compassionate to all living
beings- Abandoning the taking of what is not given, he abstains
from taking what is not given; taking only what is given, expect-
ing only what is given, by not stealing he abides in purity.
Abandoning incelibacy, he observes celibacy, living apart,
abstaining from the vulgar practice of sexual intercourse.

"Abandoning false speech, he abstains from false speech; he
speaks truth, adheres to truth, is trustworthy and reliable, one
who is no deceiver of the world. Abandoning malicious speech,
he abstains from malicious speech; he does not repeat elsewhere
what he has heard here in order to divide [those peoplej from
these, nor does he repeat to these people what he has heard else-
where in order to divide [these people] from those; thus he is
one who reunites those who are divided, a promoter of friend-
ships, who enjoys concord, rejoices in concord, delights in con-
cord, a speaker of words that promote concord. Abandoning
harsh speech, he abstains from harsh speech; he speaks such
words as are gentle, pleasing to the ear, and loveable, as go to
the heart, are courteous, desired by many [180] and agreeable to
many. Abandoning gossip, he abstains from gossip; he speaks at
the right time, speaks what is fact, speaks on what is good,
speaks on the Dhamma and the Discipline; at the right time he
speaks such words as are worth recording, reasonable, moder-
ate, and beneficial.

"He abstains from injuring seeds and plants. He practises eat-
ing only in one part of the day, abstaining from eating at night
and outside the proper time. 321 He abstains from dancing,
singing, music, and theatrical shows. He abstains from wearing
garlands, smartening himself with scent, and embellishing him-
self with unguents. He abstains from high and large couches. He
abstains from accepting gold and silver. He abstains from
accepting raw grain. He abstains from accepting raw meat. He
abstains from accepting women and girls. He abstains from
accepting men and women slaves. He abstains from accepting
goats and sheep. He abstains from accepting fowl and pigs. He
abstains from accepting elephants, cattle, horses, and mares. He
abstains from accepting fields and land. He abstains from going
errands and running messages. He abstains from buying and
selling. He abstains from false weights, false metals, and false
Pleasures. He abstains from cheating, deceiving, defrauding.



274 Culahatthipadopama Sutta: Sutta 27


i 181


and trickery. He abstains from wounding, murdering, binding,
brigandage, plunder, and violence.

14. "He becomes content with robes to protect his body and
with almsfood to maintain his stomach, and wherever he goes,
he sets out taking only these with him. Just as a bird, wherever it
goes, flies with its wings as its only burden, so too the bhikkhu
becomes content with robes to protect his body and with alms-
food to maintain his stomach, and wherever he goes, he sets out
taking only these with him. Possessing this aggregate of noble
virtue, he experiences within himself a bliss that is blameless.

15. "On seeing a form with the eye, he does not grasp at its
signs and features. Since, if he left the eye faculty unguarded,
evil unwholesome states of covetousness and grief might invade
him, he practises the way of its restraint, he guards the eye fac-
ulty, he undertakes the restraint of the eye faculty. 322 On hearing
a sound with the ear. ..On smelling an odour with the nose... On
tasting a flavour with the tongue... On touching a tangible with
the body... On cognizing a mind-object with the mind, he does
not grasp at its signs and features. Since, if he left the mind fac-
ulty unguarded, evil unwholesome states of covetousness and
grief might invade him, he practises the way of its restraint,
[181] he guards the mind faculty, he undertakes the restraint of
the mind faculty. Possessing this noble restraint of the faculties,
he experiences within himself a bliss that is unsullied.

16. "He becomes one who acts in full awareness when going
forward and returning; who acts in full awareness when looking
ahead and looking away; who acts in full awareness when flex-
ing and extending his limbs; who acts in full awareness when
wearing his robes and carrying his outer robe and bowl; who
acts in full awareness when eating, drinking, consuming food,
and tasting; who acts in full awareness when defecating and uri-
nating; who acts in full awareness when walking, standing, sit-
ting, falling asleep, waking up, talking, and keeping silent.

17. "Possessing this aggregate of noble virtue, and this noble
restraint of the faculties, and possessing this noble mindfulness
and full awareness, he resorts to a secluded resting place: the
forest, the root of a tree, a mountain, a ravine, a hillside cave, a
charnel ground, a jungle thicket, an open space, a heap of straw.

18. "On returning from his almsround, after his meal he sits
down, folding his legs crosswise, setting his body erect, and




The Simile of the Elephant's Footprint ( Shorter) 275




establishing mindfulness before him. Abandoning covetousness
for the world, he abides with a mind free from covetousness; he
purifies his mind from covetousness. 323 Abandoning ill will and
hatred, he abides with a mind free from ill will, compassionate
for the welfare of all living beings; he purifies his mind from ill
w ill and hatred. Abandoning sloth and torpor, he abides free
from sloth and torpor, percipient of light, mindful and fully
aware; he purifies his mind from sloth and torpor. Abandoning
restlessness and remorse, he abides unagitated with a mind
inwardly peaceful; he purifies his mind from restlessness and
remorse. Abandoning doubt, he abides having gone beyond
doubt, unperplexed about wholesome states; he purifies his
mind from doubt.

19. "Having thus abandoned these five hindrances, imperfec-
tions of the mind that weaken wisdom, quite secluded from sensu-
al pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, he enters upon
and abides in the first jhana, which is accompanied by applied and
sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
This, brahmin, is called a footprint of the Tathagata, something
scraped by the Tathagata, something marked by die Tathagata,
but a noble disciple does not yet come to the conclusion: 'The
Blessed One is fully enlightened, the Dhamma is well proclaimed
by the Blessed One, the Sangha is practising the good way/ 324

20. "Again, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought,
a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second jhana, which
has self-confidence and singleness of mind without applied and
sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of concentra-
tion. This too, brahmin, is called a footprint of the Tathagata...
but a noble [182] disciple does not yet come to the conclusion:
'The Blessed One is fully enlightened...'

21. "Again, with the fading away as well of rapture, a bhikkhu
abides in equanimity, and mindful and fully aware, still feeling
pleasure with the body, he enters upon and abides in the third
jhana, on account of which noble ones announce: 'He has a
pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.' This too,
brahmin, is called a footprint of the Tathagata... but a noble dis-
ciple does not yet come to the conclusion: "The Blessed One is
fully enlightened. . .'

22. "Again, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and
"dth the previous disappearance of joy and grief, a bhikkhu



276 Culahatthipadopama Sutta: Sutta 27


i 183


enters upon and abides in the fourth jhana, which has neither-
pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.
This too, brahmin, is called a footprint of the Tathagata... but a
noble disciple does not yet come to the conclusion: 'The Blessed
One is fully enlightened . . . '

23. "When his concentrated mind is thus purified, bright,
unblemished, rid of imperfection, malleable, wieldy, steady, and
attained to imperturbability, he directs it to knowledge of the
recollection of past lives. He recollects his manifold past lives,
that is, one birth, two births, three births, four births, five
births, ten births, twenty births, thirty births, forty births, fifty
births, a hundred births, a thousand births, a hundred thousand
births, many aeons of world-contraction, many aeons of world-
expansion, many aeons of world-contraction and expansion:
...(as Sutta 4, §27 )... Thus with their aspects and particulars he
recollects his manifold past lives. This too, brahmin, is called a
footprint of the Tathagata. . .but a noble disciple does not yet come
to the conclusion: 'The Blessed One is fully enlightened.. / [183]

24. "When his concentrated mind is thus purified, bright,
unblemished, rid of imperfection, malleable, wieldy, steady, and
attained to imperturbability, he directs it to knowledge of the
passing away and reappearance of beings. With the divine eye,
which is purified and surpasses the human, he sees beings
passing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and
ugly, fortunate and unfortunate. He understands how beings
pass on according to their actions thus:... (as Sutta 4, §29 )... Thus
with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human,
he sees beings passing away and reappearing, inferior and supe-
rior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and he under-
stands how beings pass on according to their actions. This too,
brahmin, is called a footprint of the Tathagata... but a noble dis-
ciple does not yet come to the conclusion: 'The Blessed One is
fully enlightened . . /

25. "When his concentrated mind is thus purified, bright,
unblemished, rid of imperfection, malleable, wieldy, steady, and
attained to imperturbability, he directs it to knowledge of the
destruction of the taints. He understands as it actually is: 'This is
suffering';... 'This is the origin of suffering';... 'This is the cessa-
tion of suffering';... 'This is the way leading to the cessation of
suffering';... 'These are the taints';... 'This is the origin of the


184


The Simile of the Elephant's Footprint (Shorter) 277


taints';- 'This is the cessation of the taints';... 'This is the way
leading to the cessation of the taints.'

"This too, brahmin, is called a footprint of the Tathagata,


something scraped by the Tathagata, something marked by the
Tathagata, but a noble disciple still has not yet come to the conclu-
sion: 'The Blessed One is fully enlightened, the Dhamma is well


proclaimed by the Blessed One, the Sangha is practising the good
way.' Rather, he is in the process of coming to this conclusion. 325
26. "When he knows and sees thus, his mind is liberated from


tire taint of sensual desire, [184] from the taint of being, and


from the taint of ignorance. When it is liberated there comes the


knowledge: 'It is liberated.' He understands: 'Birth is destroyed,
the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done,
there is no more coming to any state of being.'

"This too, brahmin, is called a footprint of the Tathagata,
something scraped by the Tathagata, something marked by the
Tathagata. It is at this point that a noble disciple has come to the
conclusion: 'The Blessed One is fully enlightened, the Dhamma
is well proclaimed by the Blessed One, the Sangha is practising
the good way.' 326 And it is at this point, brahmin, that the simile
of the elephant's footprint has been completed in detail."

27. When this was said, the brahmin Janussoni said to the
Blessed One: "Magnificent, Master Gotama! Magnificent, Master
Gotama! Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many
ways, as though he were turning upright what had been over-
thrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one
who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with


eyesight to see forms. I go to Master Gotama for refuge and to
the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus. From today let
Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone to
him for refuge for life."


j

-I

ixk ■



28 Mahahatthipadopama Sutta
The Greater Discourse on the Simile
of the Elephant's Footprint


1. Thus have I heard . 327 On one occasion the Blessed One was
living at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There
the venerable Sariputta addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Friends,
bhikkhus." - "Friend," they replied. The venerable Sariputta
said this:

2. "Friends, just as the footprint of any living being that
walks can be placed within an elephant's footprint, and so the
elephant's footprint is declared the chief of them because of its
great size; so too, all wholesome states can be included in the
Four Noble Truths. 328 In what four? In the noble truth of suffer-
ing, [185] in the noble truth of the origin of suffering, in the
noble truth of the cessation of suffering, and in the noble truth
of the way leading to the cessation of suffering.

3. "And what is the noble truth of suffering? Birth is suffering,
ageing is suffering, death is suffering; sorrow, lamentation, pain,
grief, and despair are suffering; not to obtain what one wants is
suffering; in short, the five aggregates affected by clinging are
suffering.

4. "And what are the five aggregates affected by clinging?
They are: the material form aggregate affected by clinging, the
feeling aggregate affected by clinging, the perception aggregate
affected by clinging, the formations aggregate affected by cling-
ing, and the consciousness aggregate affected by clinging.

5. "And what is the material form aggregate affected by cling-
ing? It is the four great elements and the material form derived
from the four great elements. And what are the four great ele-
ments? They are the earth element, the water element, the fire
element, and the air element.




278


186


The Simile of the Elephant's Footprint (Greater) 279


(the earth element)

"What, friends, is the earth element? The earth element may
be either internal or external. What is the internal earth element?
Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is solid, solidified,
and clung-to; that is, head-hairs, body-hairs, nails, teeth, skin,
flesh, sinews, bones, bone-marrow, kidneys, heart, liver,
diaphragm, spleen, lungs, large intestines, small intestines, con-
tents of the stomach, feces, or whatever else internally, belong-
ing to oneself, is solid, solidified, and clung-to: this is called the
internal earth element. 329 Now both the internal earth element
and the external earth element are simply earth element. 330 And
that should be seen as it actually is with proper wisdom thus:
'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.' When one
sees it thus as it actually is with proper wisdom, one becomes
disenchanted with the earth element and makes the mind dis-
passionate toward the earth element.

7. "Now there comes a time when the water element is dis-
turbed and then the external earth element vanishes. 331 When


even this external earth element, great as it is, is seen to be
impermanent, subject to destruction, disappearance, and
change, what of this body, which is clung to by craving and
lasts but a while? There can be no considering that as T or
mine' or 'I am.' 332

8. "So then, if others abuse, revile, scold, and harass a bhikkhu
[who has seen this element as it actually is], he understands
thus: 'This painful feeling bom of ear-contact has arisen in me.
That is dependent, not independent. Dependent on what? [186]
Dependent on contact.' 333 Then he sees that contact is imperma-
nent, that feeling is impermanent, that perception is imperma-
nent, that formations are impermanent, and that consciousness
is impermanent. And his mind, having made an element its
objective support, enters into [that new objective support] and
acquires confidence, steadiness, and decision. 334

9. "Now, if others attack that bhikkhu in ways that are
unwished for, undesired, and disagreeable, by contact with fists,
clods, sticks, or knives, he understands thus: 'This body is of
such a nature that contact with fists, clods, sticks, and knives
assail it. 335 But this has been said by the Blessed One in his


advice on the simile of the saw": "Bhikkhus, even if bandits


280 Mahahatthipadopama Sutta: Sutta 28


i 187


were to sever you savagely limb by limb with a two-handled
saw, he who gave rise to a mind of hate towards them would
not be carrying out my teaching." 336 So tireless energy shall be
aroused in me and unremitting mindfulness established, my
body shall be tranquil and untroubled, my mind concentrated
and unified. And now let contact with fists, clods, sticks, and
knives assail this body; for this is just how the Buddha's teach-
ing is practised.'

10. "When that bhikkhu thus recollects the Buddha, the
Dhamma, and the Sangha, if equanimity supported by the
wholesome does not become established in him, then he arouses
a sense of urgency thus: 'It is a loss for me, it is no gain for me, it
is bad for me, it is no good for me, that when I thus recollect the
Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha, equanimity supported
by the wholesome does not become established in me.' 337 Just as
when a daughter-in-law sees her father-in-law, she arouses a
sense of urgency [to please him], so too, when that bhikkhu thus
recollects the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha, if equa-
nimity supported by the wholesome does not become estab-
lished in him, then he arouses a sense of urgency. But if, when
he recollects the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha, equa-
nimity supported by the wholesome becomes established in
him, [187] then he is satisfied with it. At that point, friends,
much has been done by that bhikkhu.

(the water element)

11. "What, friends, is the water element? The water element may
be either internal or external. What is the internal water ele-
ment? Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is water,
watery, and clung-to; that is, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat,
tears, grease, spittle, snot, oil-of-the-joints, urine, or whatever
else internally, belonging to oneself, is water, watery, and clung-
to: this is called the internal water element. Now both the inter-
nal water element and the external water element are simply
water element. And that should be seen as it actually is with
proper wisdom thus: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not
my self.' When one sees it thus as it actually is with proper wis-
dom, one becomes disenchanted with the water element and
makes the mind dispassionate toward the water element.


The Simile of the Elephant's Footprint (Greater) 281


12. "Now there comes a time when the external water element
is disturbed. It carries away villages, towns, cities, districts, and
countries. There comes a time when the waters in the great
ocean sink down a hundred leagues, two hundred leagues, three
hundred leagues, four hundred leagues, five hundred leagues,
six hundred leagues, seven hundred leagues. There comes a
time when the waters in the great ocean stand seven palms
deep, six palms deep. . .two palms deep, only a palm deep. There
comes a time when the waters in the great ocean stand seven
fathoms deep, six fathoms deep... two fathoms deep, only a
fathom deep. There comes a time when the waters in the great
ocean stand half a fathom deep, only waist deep, only knee
deep, only ankle deep. There comes a time when the waters in
the great ocean are not enough to wet even the joint of a finger.
When even this external water element, great as it is, [188] is
seen to be impermanent, subject to destruction, disappearance,
and change, what of this body, which is clung to by craving and
lasts but a while? There can be no considering that as T or
'mine' or 'I am.'

13-15. "So then, if others abuse, revile, scold, and harass a
bhikkhu [who has seen this element as it actually is], he under-
stands thus :... (repeat §§8-10 ). ..At that point too, friends, much
has been done by that bhikkhu.

(the fire element)

16. "What, friends, is the fire element? The fire element may be
either internal or external. What is the internal fire element?
Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is fire, fiery, and
clung-to; that is, that by which one is warmed, ages, and is con-
sumed, and that by which what is eaten, drunk, consumed, and
tasted gets completely digested, or whatever else internally,
belonging to oneself, is fire, fiery, and clung-to: this is called the
internal fire element. Now both the internal fire element and the
external fire element are simply fire element. And that should be
seen as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: 'This is not mine,
this I am not, this is not my self.' When one sees it thus as it
actually is with proper wisdom, one becomes disenchanted with
the fire element and makes the mind dispassionate toward the
fire element.



282 Mnhahatthipadopama Sutta: Sutta 28


i 189


' 1

|! 17. "Now there comes a time when the external fire element is

disturbed. It burns up villages, towns, cities, districts, and coun-
tries. It goes out due to lack of fuel only when it comes to green
grass, or to a road, or to a rock, or to water, or to a fair open
space. There comes a time when they seek to make a fire even
with cocks' feathers and hide-parings. When even this external
fire element, great as it is, is seen to be impermanent, subject to
destruction, disappearance, and change, what of this body,
which is clung to by craving and lasts but a while? There can be
no considering that as T or 'mine' or 'I am.'

18-20. "So then, if others abuse, revile, scold, and harass a
bhikkhu [who has seen this element as it actually is], he under-
stands thus:... (repeat §§8-10 ). ..At that point too, friends, much
has been done by that bhikkhu.

(the air element)

21. "What, friends, is the air element? The air element may be
either internal or external. What is the internal air element?
Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is air, airy, and
clung-to; that is, up-going winds, down-going winds, winds in
the belly, winds in the bowels, winds that course through the
limbs, in-breath and out-breath, or whatever else internally,
belonging to oneself, is air, airy, and clung-to: this is called the
internal air element. Now both the internal air element and the
external air element are simply air element. And that should be
seen as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: 'This is not
mine, this I am not, this is not my self.' When one sees it thus as
it actually is with proper wisdom, one becomes disenchanted
with the air element and makes the mind dispassionate toward
the air element. [189]

22. "Now there comes a time when the external air element is
disturbed. It sweeps away villages, towns, cities, districts, and
countries. There comes a time in the last month of the hot season
when they seek wind by means of a fan or bellows and even the
strands of straw in the drip-fringe of the thatch do not stir. When
even this external air element, great as it is, is seen to be imper-
manent, subject to destruction, disappearance, and change, what
of this body, which is clung to by craving and lasts but a while?
There can be no considering that as T or 'mine' or 'I am.'


I


j 191


The Simile of the Elephant’s Footprint (Greater) 283


23-25- "So then, if others abuse, revile, scold, and harass a
bhikkhu [who has seen this element as it actually is], he under-
stands thus:... [190] ( repeat §§8~10)... At that point too, friends,
much has been done by that bhikkhu.

26. "Friends, just as when a space is enclosed by timber and
creepers, grass, and clay, it comes to be termed 'house/ so too,
when a space is enclosed by bones and sinews, flesh and skin, it
comes to be termed 'material form.' 338

27. "If, friends, internally the eye is intact but no external
forms come into its range, and there is no corresponding [con-
scious] engagement, then there is no manifestation of the
corresponding class of consciousness. 339 If internally the eye is
intact and external forms come into its range, but there is no
corresponding, [conscious] engagement, then there is no mani-
festation of the corresponding class of consciousness. But when
internally the eye is intact and external forms come into its
range and there is the corresponding [conscious] engagement,
then there is the manifestation of the corresponding class of
consciousness.

28. "The rnaterial form in what has thus come to be is includ-
ed in the material form aggregate affected by clinging. 340 The
feeling in what has thus come to be is included in the feeling
aggregate affected by clinging. The perception in what has thus
come to be is included in the perception aggregate affected by
clinging. The formations in what has thus come to be are
included in the formations aggregate affected by clinging. The
consciousness in what has thus come to be is included in the
consciousness aggregate affected by clinging. He understands
thus: 'This, indeed, is how there comes to be the inclusion,
gathering, and amassing of things into these five aggregates
affected by clinging. Now this has been said by the Blessed
One: "One who sees [191] dependent origination sees the
Dhamma; one who sees the Dhamma sees dependent origina-
tion." 341 And these five aggregates affected by clinging are
dependently arisen. The desire, indulgence, inclination, and
holding based on these five aggregates affected by clinging is
the origin of suffering. 342 The removal of desire and lust, the
abandonment of desire and lust for these five aggregates affect-
ed by clinging is the cessation of suffering.' At that point too,
friends, much has been done by that bhikkhu. 343


284 Mahahatthipadopama Sutta: Sutta 28


i 191


29-30. "If, friends, internally the ear is intact but no external
sounds come into its range. ..(as in §§27-28). ..At that point too,
friends, much has been done by that bhikkhu.

31-32. "If, friends, internally the nose is intact but no external
smells come into its range... At that point too, friends, much has
been done by that bhikkhu.

33-34. "If, friends, internally the tongue is intact but no exter-
nal flavours come into its range... At that point too, friends,
much has been done by that bhikkhu.

35-36. "If, friends, internally the body is intact but no external
tangibles come into its range... At that point too, friends, much
has been done by that bhikkhu.

37. "If, friends, internally the mind is intact but no external
mind-objects come into its range, and there is no corresponding
[conscious] engagement, then there is no manifestation of the
corresponding class of consciousness. 344 If internally the mind is
intact and external mind-objects come into its range, but there is
no corresponding [conscious] engagement, then there is no man-
ifestation of the corresponding class of consciousness. 345 But
when internally the mind is intact and external mind-objects
come into its range and there is the corresponding [conscious]
engagement, then there is the manifestation of the correspond-
ing class of consciousness.

38. "The material form in what has thus come to be is included
in the material form aggregate affected by clinging. The feeling
in what has thus come to be is included in the feeling aggregate
affected by clinging. The perception in what has thus come to be
is included in the perception aggregate affected by clinging. The
formations in what has thus come to be are included in the for-
mations aggregate affected by clinging. The consciousness in
what has thus come to be is included in the consciousness aggre-
gate affected by clinging. He understands thus: 'This, indeed, is
how there comes to be the inclusion, gathering, and amassing of
things into these five aggregates affected by clinging. Now this
has been said by the Blessed One: "One who sees dependent
origination sees the Dhamma; one who sees the Dhamma sees
dependent origination." And these five aggregates affected by
clinging are dependently arisen. The desire, indulgence, inclina-
tion, and holding based on these five aggregates affected by
clinging is the origin of suffering. The removal of desire and


191


The Simile of the Elephant's Footprint (Greater) 285


just, the abandonment of desire and lust for these five aggre-
gates affected by clinging is the cessation of suffering.' At that
point too, friends, much has been done by that bhikkhu."

That is what the venerable Sariputta said. The bhikkhus were
satisfied and delighted in the venerable Sariputta's words.


29 Mahasaropama Sutta
The Greater Discourse
on the Simile of the Heartwood

[192] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One
was living at Rajagaha on the mountain Vulture Peak; it was
soon after Devadatta had left. 346 There, referring to Devadatta,
the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus:

2. "Bhikkhus, here some clansman goes forth out of faith from
the home life into homelessness, considering: 'I am a victim of
birth, ageing, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and
despair; I am a victim of suffering, a prey to suffering. Surely an
ending of this whole mass of suffering can be known.' When he
has gone forth thus, he acquires gain, honour, and renown. He
is pleased with that gain, honour, and renown, and his intention
is fulfilled. On account of it he lauds himself and disparages oth-
ers thus: 'I have gain, honour, and renown, but these other
bhikkhus are unknown, of no account.' He becomes intoxicated
with that gain, honour, and renown, grows negligent, falls into
negligence, and being negligent, he lives in suffering.

"Suppose a man needing heartwood, seeking heartwood,
wandering in search of heartwood, came to a great tree standing
possessed of heartwood. Passing over its heartwood, its sap-
wood, its inner bark, and its outer bark, he would cut off its
twigs and leaves and take them away thinking they were heart-
wood. Then a man with good sight, seeing him, might say: 'This
good man did not know the heartwood, the sapwood, the inner
bark, the outer bark, or the twigs and leaves. Thus, while need-
ing heartwood, seeking heartwood, wandering in search of
heartwood, he came to a great tree standing possessed of heart-
wood, and passing over its heartwood, its sapwood, its inner
bark, and its outer bark, he cut off its twigs and leaves and took
them away thinking they were heartwood. Whatever it was this


286


The Greater Discourse on the Simile of the Heartwood 287



ood man had to make with heartwood, his purpose will not be
served.’ So too, bhikkhus, here some clansman goes forth out of
faith-- -[193]... he lives in suffering. This bhikkhu is called one
vvho has taken the twigs and leaves of the holy life and stopped
short with that.

3. "Here, bhikkhus, some clansman goes forth out of faith
from the home life into homelessness, considering: 'I am a vic-
tim of birth, ageing, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain,
grief, and despair; I am a victim of suffering, a prey to suffering.
Surely an ending of this whole mass of suffering can be known/
When he has gone forth thus, he acquires gain, honour, and
renown. He is not pleased with that gain, honour, and renown,
and his intention is not fulfilled. He does not, on account of it,
laud himself and disparage others. He does not become intoxi-
cated with that gain, honour, and renown; he does not grow
negligent and fall into negligence. Being diligent, he achieves
the attainment of virtue. He is pleased with that attainment of
virtue and his intention is fulfilled. On account of it he lauds
himself and disparages others thus: 'I am virtuous, of good
character, but these other bhikkhus are immoral, of evil charac-
ter.' He becomes intoxicated with that attainment of virtue,
grows negligent, falls into negligence, and being negligent, he
lives in suffering.

"Suppose a man needing heartwood, seeking heartwood,
wandering in search of heartwood, came to a great tree standing
possessed of heartwood. Passing over its heartwood, its sap-
wood, and its inner bark, he would cut off its outer bark and
take it away thinking it was heartwood. Then a man with good
sight, seeing him, might say: 'This good man did not know the
heartwood... or the twigs and leaves. Thus, while needing heart-
wood. . .he cut off its outer bark and took it away thinking it was
heartwood. Whatever it was this good man had to make with
heartwood, his purpose will not be served.' So too, bhikkhus,
here some clansman goes forth out of faith... he lives in suffer-
ing. [194] This bhikkhu is called one who has taken the outer
bark of the holy life and stopped short with that.

4. "Here, bhikkhus, some clansman goes forth out of faith
from the home life into homelessness, considering: 1 am a vic-
tim of birth, ageing, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain.


288 Mahasaropama Sutia: S utta 29


i 195


grief, and despair; I am a victim of suffering, a prey to suffering.
Surely an ending of this whole mass of suffering can be known.'
When he has gone forth thus, he acquires gain, honour, and
renown. He is not pleased with that gain, honour, and renown,
and his intention is not fulfilled... Being diligent, he achieves the
attainment of virtue. He is pleased with that attainment of
virtue, but his intention is not fulfilled. He does not, on account
of it, laud himself and disparage others. He does not become
intoxicated with that attainment of virtue; he does not grow neg-
ligent and fall into negligence. Being diligent, he achieves the
attainment of concentration. He is pleased with that attainment
of concentration and his intention is fulfilled. On account of it he
lauds himself and disparages others thus: 'I am concentrated, my
mind is unified, but these other bhikkhus are unconcentrated,
with their minds astray.' He becomes intoxicated with that
attainment of concentration, grows negligent, falls into negli-
gence, and being negligent, he lives in suffering.

"Suppose a man needing heartwood, seeking heartwood,
wandering in search of heartwood, came to a great tree standing
possessed of heartwood. Passing over its heartwood and its sap-
wood, he would cut off its inner bark and take it away thinking
it was heartwood. Then a man with good sight, seeing him,
might say: 'This good man did not know the heartwood... or the
twigs and leaves. Thus, while needing heartwood... he cut off its
inner bark and took it away thinking it was heartwood.
Whatever it was this good man had to make with heartwood,
his purpose will not be served.' So too, bhikkhus, here some
clansman goes forth out of faith. . .he lives in suffering. [195] This
bhikkhu is called one who has taken the inner bark of the holy
life and stopped short with that.

5. "Here, bhikkhus, some clansman goes forth out of faith
from the home life into homelessness, considering: 1 am a vic-
tim of birth, ageing, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain,
grief, and despair; I am a victim of suffering, a prey to suffering.
Surely an ending of this whole mass of suffering can be known.'
When he has gone forth thus, he acquires gain, honour, and
renown. He is not pleased with that gain, honour, and renown,
and his intention is not fulfilled... Being diligent, he achieves the
attainment of virtue. He is pleased with that attainment of
virtue, but his intention is not fulfilled... Being diligent, he


I -^96 The Greater Discourse on the Simile of the Heartwood 289

achieves the attainment of concentration. He is pleased with that
attainment of concentration, but his intention is not fulfilled. He
does not, on account of it, laud himself and disparage others. He
does not become intoxicated with that attainment of concentra-
tion; he does not grow negligent and fall into negligence. Being
diligent, he achieves knowledge and vision. 347 He is pleased
with that knowledge and vision and his intention is fulfilled. On
account of it he lauds himself and disparages others thus: 'I live
knowing and seeing, but these other bhikkhus live unknowing
and unseeing.' He becomes intoxicated with that knowledge
and vision, grows negligent, falls into negligence, and being
negligent, he lives in suffering,

"Suppose a man needing heartwood, seeking heartwood,
wandering in search of heartwood, came to a great tree standing
possessed of heartwood. Passing over its heartwood, he would
cut off its sapwood and take it away thinking it was heartwood.
Then a man with good sight, seeing him, might say: 'This good
man did not know the heartwood... or the twigs and leaves.
Thus, while needing heartwood... he cut off its sapwood and
took it away thinking it was heartwood. Whatever it was this
good man had to make with heartwood, his purpose will not be
served.' [196] So too, bhikkhus, here some clansman goes forth
out of faith... he lives in suffering. This bhikkhu is called one
who has taken the sapwood of the holy life and stopped short
with that.

6. "Here, bhikkhus, some clansman goes forth out of faith
from the home life into homelessness, considering: 'I am a vic-
tim of birth, ageing, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain,
grief, and despair; I am a victim of suffering, a prey to suffering.
Surely an ending of this whole mass of suffering can be known.'
When he has gone forth thus, he acquires gain, honour, and
renown. He is not pleased with that gain, honour, and renown,
and his intention is not fulfilled... When he is diligent, he
achieves the attainment of virtue. He is pleased with that attain-
ment of virtue, but his intention is not fulfilled... When he is dili-
gent, he achieves the attainment of concentration. He is pleased
with that attainment of concentration, but his intention is not
fulfilled... When he is diligent, he achieves knowledge and
vision. He is pleased with that knowledge and vision, but his
intention is not fulfilled. He does not, on account of it, laud




290 MaMsclropama Sutta: Sutta 2 9


i 197


himself and disparage others. He does not become intoxicated
with that knowledge and vision; he does not grow negligent and
fall into negligence. Being diligent, he attains perpetual libera-
tion. And it is impossible for that bhikkhu to fall away from that
perpetual deliverance. 348

"Suppose a man needing heartwood, seeking heartwood,
wandering in search of heartwood, came to a great tree standing
possessed of heartwood, and cutting off only its heartwood, he
would take it away knowing it was heartwood. Then a man
with good sight, seeing him, might say: 'This good man knew
the heartwood, the sapwood, the inner bark, the outer bark, and
the twigs and leaves. Thus, while needing heartwood, seeking
heartwood, wandering in search of heartwood, [197] he came to
a great tree standing possessed of heartwood, and cutting off
only its heartwood, he took it away knowing it was heartwood.
Whatever it was this good man had to make with heartwood,
his purpose will be served.' So too, bhikkhus, here some clans-
man goes forth out of faith. . .When he is diligent, he attains per-
petual liberation. And it is impossible for that bhikkhu to fall
away from that perpetual deliverance.

7. "So this holy life, bhikkhus, does not have gain, honour,
and renown for its benefit, or the attainment of virtue for its
benefit, or the attainment of concentration for its benefit, or
knowledge and vision for its benefit. But it is this unshakeable
deliverance of mind that is the goal of this holy life, its heart-
wood, and its end." 349

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


30 Culasaropama Sutta
The Shorter Discourse on the Simile
of the Heartwood


[198] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One
was living at Savatthl in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika’s Park.

2. Then the brahmin Pingalakoccha went to the Blessed One
and exchanged greetings with him. When this courteous and
amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and said to
the Blessed One:

"Master Gotama, there are these recluses and brahmins, each
the head of an order, the head of a group, the teacher of a group,
a well-known and famous founder of a sect regarded by many
as a saint - that is, Parana Kassapa, Makkhali Gosala, Ajita
Kesakambalin, Pakudha Kaccayana, Sanjaya Belatthiputta, and
the Nigantha Nataputta. 350 Have they all had direct knowledge
as they claim, or have none of them had direct knowledge, or
have some of them had direct knowledge and some not?"

"Enough, brahmin! Let this be! - 'Have they all had direct
knowledge as they claim, or have none of them had direct
knowledge, or have some of them had direct knowledge and
some not?' I shall teach you the Dhamma, brahmin. Listen and
attend closely to what I shall say." 351

"Yes, sir," the brahmin Pingalakoccha replied. The Blessed
One said this:

3. "Suppose, brahmin, a man needing heartwood, seeking
heartwood, wandering in search of heartwood, came to a great
tree standing possessed of heartwood. Passing over its heart-
wood, its sapwood, its inner bark, and its outer bark, he would
cut off its twigs and leaves and take them away thinking they
were heartwood. Then a man with good sight, seeing him,
might say: 'This good man did not know the heartwood, the
sapwood, the inner bark, the outer bark, or the twigs and leaves.


291


292 Cfilasaropama Sutta: Sutta 30


i 199


Thus, while needing heartwood, seeking heartwood, wandering
in search of heartwood, he came to a great tree standing pos-
sessed of heartwood, and passing over its heartwood, its sap-
wood, its inner bark, and its outer bark, he cut off its twigs and
leaves and took them away thinking they were heartwood.
Whatever it was this good man had to make with heartwood,
his purpose will not be served/

4. "Suppose a man needing heartwood, seeking heartwood,
wandering in search of heartwood, came to a great tree standing
possessed of heartwood. Passing over its heartwood, its sap-
wood [199] and its inner bark, he would cut off its outer bark
and take it away thinking it was heartwood. Then a man with
good sight, seeing him, might say: 'This good man did not know
the heartwood... or the twigs and leaves. Thus, while needing
heartwood... he cut off its outer bark and took it away thinking
it was heartwood. Whatever it was this good man had to make
with heartwood, his purpose will not be served.'

5. "Suppose a man needing heartwood, seeking heartwood,
wandering in search of heartwood, came to a great tree standing
possessed of heartwood. Passing over its heartwood and its sap-
wood, he would cut off its inner bark and take it away thinking
it was heartwood. Then a man with good sight, seeing him,
might say: 'This good man did not know the heartwood... or the
twigs and leaves. Thus, while needing heartwood... he cut off its
inner bark and took it away thinking it was heartwood. What-
ever it was this good man, had to make with heartwood, his pur-
pose will not be served.'

6. "Suppose a man needing heartwood, seeking heartwood,
wandering in search of heartwood, came to a great tree stand-
ing possessed of heartwood. Passing over its heartwood, he
would cut off its sapwood and take it away thinking it was
heartwood. Then a man with good sight, seeing him, might say:
'This good man did not know the heartwood... or the twigs and
leaves. Thus, while needing heartwood... he cut off its sapwood
and took it away thinking it was heartwood. Whatever it was
this good man had to make with heartwood, his purpose will
not be served.'

7. "Suppose a man needing heartwood, seeking heartwood,
wandering in search of heartwood, came to a great tree standing



The Shorter Discourse on the Simile of the Heartwood 293

possessed of heartwood, and cutting off only its heartwood, he
would take it away knowing it was heartwood. Then a man
with good sight, seeing him, might say: 'This good man knew
the heartwood, the sapwood, the inner bark, the outer bark, and
the twigs and leaves. Thus, while needing heartwood, seeking
heartwood, wandering in search of heartwood, he came to a
great tree standing possessed of heartwood, and cutting off only
its heartwood, [200] he took it away knowing it was heartwood.
Whatever it was this good man had to make with heartwood,
his purpose will be served.'

8. "So too, brahmin, here some clansman goes forth out of
faith from the home life into homelessness, considering: 'I am a
victim of birth, ageing, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain,
grief, and despair; I am a victim of suffering, a prey to suffering.
Surely an ending of this whole mass of suffering can be known.'
When he has gone forth thus, he acquires gain, honour, and
renown. He is pleased with that gain, honour, and renown, and
his intention is fulfilled. On account of it he lauds himself and
disparages others thus: 'I have gain, honour, and renown, but
these other bhikkhus are unknown, of no account.' So he arouses
no desire to act, he makes no effort for the realisation of those
other states that are higher and more sublime than gain, honour,
and renown; he hangs back and slackens. 352 I say that this per-
son is like the man needing heartwood, who came to a great tree
standing possessed of heartwood, and passing over its heart-
wood, its sapwood, its inner bark, and its outer bark, cut off its
twigs and leaves and took them away thinking they were heart-
wood; and so whatever it was he had to make with heartwood,
his purpose will not have been served.

9. "Here, brahmin, some clansman goes forth out of faith from
the home life into homelessness, considering: 'I am a victim of
birth, ageing, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and
despair; I am a victim of suffering, a prey to suffering. Surely an
ending of this whole mass of suffering can be known.' When he
has gone forth thus, he acquires gain, honour, and renown. He
is not pleased with that gain, honour, and renown, and his
intention is not fulfilled. He does not, on account of it, laud him-
self and disparage others. He arouses desire to act and he makes
an effort for the realisation of those other states that are higher



294 Culasdropama Sutta: Sutta 30


i 201


and more sublime than gain, honour, and renown; he does not
hang back and slacken. He achieves the attainment of virtue. He
is pleased with that attainment of virtue and his intention is ful-
filled. On account of it he lauds himself and disparages others
thus: 'I am virtuous, of good character, but these other bhikkhus
are immoral, of evil character.' So he arouses no desire to act, he
makes no effort for the realisation of those other states that are
higher and more sublime than the attainment of virtue; [201] he
hangs back and slackens. I say that this person is like the man
needing heartwood...who passing over its heartwood, its sap-
wood, and its inner bark, cut off its outer bark and took it away
thinking it was heartwood; and so whatever it was he had to
make with heartwood, his purpose will not have been served.

10. "Here, brahmin, some clansman goes forth out of faith
from the home life into homelessness, considering: 'I am a vic-
tim of birth, ageing, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain,
grief, and despair; I am a victim of suffering, a prey to suffering.
Surely an ending of this whole mass of suffering can be known.'
When he has gone forth thus, he acquires gain, honour, and
renown. He is not pleased with that gain, honour, and renown,
and his intention is not fulfilled. He achieves the attainment of
virtue. He is pleased with that attainment of virtue, but his
intention is not fulfilled. He does not, on account of it, laud him-
self and disparage others. He arouses desire to act and he makes
an effort for the realisation of those other states that are higher
and more sublime than, the attainment of virtue; he does not
hang back and slacken. He achieves the attainment of concentra-
tion. He is pleased with that attainment of concentration and his
intention is fulfilled. On account of it he lauds himself and dis-
parages others thus: 'I am concentrated, my mind is unified, but
these other bhikkhus are unconcentrated, with their minds
astray.' So he arouses no desire to act, he makes no effort for the
realisation of those other states that are higher and more sub-
lime than the attainment of concentration; he hangs back and
slackens. I say that this person is like the man needing heart-
wood... who passing over its heartwood and its sap wood, cut
off its inner bark and took it away thinking it was heartwood;
and so whatever it was he had to make with heartwood, his pur-
pose will not have been served.

11. "Here, brahmin, some clansman goes forth out of faith


i 203 Tfc Shorter Discourse on the Simile of the Heartwood 295

from the home life into homelessness, considering: 'I am a victim
of birth, ageing, and death, [202] of sorrow, lamentation, pain,
grief, and despair; I am a victim of suffering, a prey to suffering.
Surely an ending of this whole mass of suffering can be known.'
When he has gone forth thus, he acquires gain, honour, and
renown. He is not pleased with that gain, honour, and renown,
and his intention is not fulfilled... He achieves the attainment of
virtue. He is pleased with that attainment of virtue, but his
intention is not fulfilled... He achieves the attainment of concen-
tration. He is pleased with that attainment of concentration, but
his intention is not fulfilled. He does not, on account of it, laud
himself and disparage others. He arouses desire to act and he
makes an effort for the realisation of those other states that are
higher and more sublime than the attainment of concentration;
he does not hang back and slacken. He achieves knowledge and
vision. He is pleased with that knowledge and vision and his
intention is fulfilled. On account of it he lauds himself and dis-
parages others thus: 'I live knowing and seeing, but these other
bhikkhus live unknowing and unseeing.' So he arouses no
desire to act, he makes no effort for the realisation of those other
states that are higher and more sublime than knowledge and
vision; he hangs back and slackens. I say that this person is like
the man needing heartwood... who passing over its heartwood,
cut off its sapwood and took it away thinking it was heartwood;
and so whatever it was he had to make with heartwood, his pur-
pose will not have been served.

12. "Here, brahmin, some clansman goes forth out of faith
from the home life into homelessness, considering: 'I am a vic-
tim of birth, ageing, and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain,
grief, and despair; I am a victim of suffering, a prey to suffering.
Surely an ending of this whole mass of suffering can be known.'
When he has gone forth thus, [203] he acquires gain, honour,
and renown. He is not pleased with that gain, honour, and
renown, and his intention is not fulfilled ... He achieves the
attainment of virtue. He is pleased with that attainment of
virtue, but his intention is not fulfilled... He achieves the attain-
ment of concentration. He is pleased with that attainment of
concentration, but his intention is not fulfilled... He achieves
knowledge and vision. He is pleased with that knowledge and
vision, but his intention is not fulfilled. He does not, on account


296 Culasaropama Sutta: Sutta 30


i 204




of it, laud himself and disparage others. He arouses desire to act
and he makes an effort for the realisation of those other states
that are higher and more sublime than knowledge and vision;
he does not hang back and slacken.

"But what, brahmin, are the states that are higher and more
sublime than knowledge and vision?

13. "Here, brahmin, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and
abides in the first jhana, which is accompanied by applied and
sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure bom of seclusion.
This is a state higher and more sublime than knowledge and
vision. 353

14. "Again, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought,
a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second jhana, which
has self-confidence and singleness of mind without applied and
sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure bom of concentra-
tion. This too is a state higher and more sublime than knowl-
edge and vision.

15. "Again, with the fading away as well of rapture, a bhikkhu
abides in equanimity, and mindful and fully aware, still feeling
pleasure with the body, he enters upon and abides in the third
jhana, on account of which noble ones announce: 'He has a pleas-
ant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.' This too [204] is
a state higher and more sublime than knowledge and vision.

16. "Again, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with
the previous disappearance of joy and grief, a bhikkhu enters
upon and abides in the fourth jhana, which has neither-pain-nor-
pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity. This too is
a state higher and more sublime than knowledge and vision.

17. "Again, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of
form, with the disappearance of perceptions of sensory impact,
with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space
is infinite', a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of infi-
nite space. This too is a state higher and more sublime than
knowledge and vision.

18. "Again, by completely surmounting the base of infinite
space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite/ a bhikkhu enters
upon and abides in the base of infinite consciousness. This too is
a state higher and more sublime than knowledge and vision.

19. "Again, by completely surmounting the base of infinite


. 205 The Shorter Discourse on the Simile of the Heartwood 297

consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing,' a bhikkhu enters
upon and abides in the base of nothingness. This too is a state
jygher and more sublime than knowledge and vision.

20. "Again, by completely surmounting the base of nothing-
ness, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of neither-
perception-nor-non-perception. This too is a state higher and
more sublime than knowledge and vision.

21. "Again, by completely surmounting the base of neither-
perception-nor-non-perception, a bhikkhu enters upon and
abides in the cessation of perception and feeling. And his taints
are destroyed by seeing with wisdom. This too is a state higher
and more sublime than knowledge and vision. These are the
states that are higher and more sublime than knowledge and
vision.

22. "I say that this person, brahmin, is like a man needing
heartwood, seeking heartwood, wandering in search of heart-
wood, who came to a great tree standing possessed of heart-
wood, and cutting off its heartwood, took it away knowing it
was heartwood; and so whatever it was he had to make with
heartwood, his purpose will have been served.

23. "So this holy life, brahmin, does not have gain, honour,
and renown for its benefit, or the attainment of virtue for its
benefit, or the attainment of concentration for its benefit, or
knowledge and vision for its benefit. But it is [205] this unshake-
able deliverance of mind that is the goal of this holy life, its
heartwood, and its end."

24. When this was said, the brahmin Pingalakoccha said to the
Blessed One: "Magnificent, Master Gotama! Magnificent, Master
Gotama! Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many
ways, as though he were turning upright what had been over-
thrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one
who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with
eyesight to see forms. I go to Master Gotama for refuge and to
the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus. From today let
Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone to
him for refuge for life."





4

The Great Division of Pairs

(Mahayamakavagga)




31 Culagosinga Sutta
The Shorter Discourse in Gosinga


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Nadika in the Brick House.

2. Now on that occasion the venerable Anuruddha, the vener-
able Nandiya, and the venerable Kimbila were living at the Park
of the Gosinga Sala-tree Wood. 354

3. Then, when it was evening, the Blessed One rose from med-
itation and went to the Park of the Gosinga Sala-tree Wood. The
park keeper saw the Blessed One coming in the distance and
told him: "Do not enter this park, recluse. There are three clans-
men here seeking their own good. Do not disturb them."

4. The venerable Anuruddha heard the park keeper speaking
to the Blessed One and told him: "Friend park keeper, do not
keep the Blessed One out. It is our Teacher, the Blessed One,
who has come." Then the venerable Anuruddha went to the
venerable Nandiya and the venerable Kimbila and said: "Come
out, venerable sirs, come out! Our Teacher, [206] the Blessed
One, has come."

5. Then all three went to meet the Blessed One. One took his
bowl and outer robe, one prepared a seat, and one set out water
for washing the feet. The Blessed One sat down on the seat made
ready and washed his feet. Then those three venerable ones paid
homage to the Blessed One and sat down at one side. When they
were seated, the Blessed One said to them: "I hope you are all
keeping well, Anuruddha, I hope you are all comfortable, I hope
you are not having any trouble getting almsfood."

"We are keeping well. Blessed One, we are comfortable, and
we are not having any trouble getting almsfood."

6. "I hope, Anuruddha, that you are all living in concord, with
mutual appreciation, without disputing, blending like milk and
water, viewing each other with kindly eyes."


302 Culagosinga Sutta: Sutta 31


i 20 7


1

"Surely, venerable sir, we are living in concord, with mutual
appreciation, without disputing, blending like milk and water,
viewing each other with kindly eyes."

"But, Anuruddha, how do you live thus?"

7. "Venerable sir, as to that, I think thus: 'It is a gain for me, it
is a great gain for me, that I am living with such companions in
the holy life.' I maintain bodily acts of loving-kindness towards
those venerable ones both openly and privately; I maintain ver-
bal acts of loving-kindness towards them both openly and pri-
vately; I maintain mental acts of loving-kindness towards them
both openly and privately. 355 I consider: 'Why should I not [207]
set aside what I wish to do and do what these venerable ones
wish to do?' Then I set aside what I wish to do and do what
these venerable ones wish to do. We are different in body, ven-
erable sir, but one in mind."

The venerable Nandiya and the venerable Kimbila each spoke
likewise, adding: "That is how, venerable sir, we are living in
concord, with mutual appreciation, without disputing, blending
like milk and water, viewing each other with kindly eyes."

8. "Good, good, Anuruddha. I hope that you all abide diligent,

I ardent, and resolute."

"Surely, venerable sir, we abide diligent, ardent, and resolute."

I "But, Anuruddha, how do you abide thus?"

| 9. "Venerable sir, as to that, whichever of us returns first from

I the village with almsfood prepares the seats, sets out the water for

I drinking and for washing, and puts the refuse bucket in its place,

j Whichever of us returns last eats any food left over, if he wishes;

| otherwise he throws it away where there is no greenery or drops

it into water where there is no life. He puts away the seats and
the water for drinking and for washing. He puts away the refuse
bucket after washing it and he sweeps out the refectory.
Whoever notices that the pots of water for drinking, washing, or
the latrine are low or empty takes care of them. If they are too
heavy for him, he calls someone else by a signal of the hand and
they move it by joining hands, but because of this we do not
break out into speech. But every five days we sit together all
night discussing the Dhamma. That is how we abide diligent,
ardent, and resolute."

10. "Good, good, Anuruddha. But while you abide thus dili-
gent, ardent, and resolute, have you attained any superhuman


The Shorter Discourse in Gosinga 303


state, a distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble
ones, a comfortable abiding?"

"Why not, venerable sir? Here, venerable sir, whenever we
want, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unwholesome states, we enter upon and abide in the first jhana,
which is accompanied by applied and sustained thought, with
rapture and pleasure born of seclusion. Venerable sir, this is a
superhuman state, a distinction in knowledge and vision wor-
thy of the noble ones, a comfortable abiding, which we have
attained while abiding diligent, ardent, and resolute."

11-13. "Good, good, Anuruddha. But is there any other super-
human state, a distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the
noble ones, a comfortable abiding, which you have attained by
surmounting that abiding, [208] by making that abiding subside?"

"Why not, venerable sir? Here, venerable sir, whenever we
want, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, we
enter upon and abide in the second jhana... With the fading
away as well of rapture... we enter upon and abide in the third
jhana... With the abandoning of pleasure and pain... we enter
upon and abide in the fourth jhana. . .Venerable sir, this is another
superhuman state, a distinction in knowledge and vision wor-
thy of the noble ones, a comfortable abiding, which we have
attained by surmounting the preceding abiding, by making that
abiding subside."

14. "Good, good, Anuruddha. But is there any other super-
human state... which you have attained by surmounting that
abiding, by making that abiding subside?"

"Why not, venerable sir? Here, venerable sir, whenever we
want, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of form,
with the disappearance of perceptions of sensory impact, with
non-attention to perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space is
infinite,’ [209] we enter upon and abide in the base of infinite
space. Venerable sir, this is another superhuman state... which
we have attained by surmounting the preceding abiding, by
making that abiding subside."

15-17. "Good, good, Anuruddha. But is there any other super-
human state... which you have attained by surmounting that
abiding, by making that abiding subside?"

"Why not, venerable sir? Here, venerable sir, whenever we
want, by completely surmounting the base of infinite space.


304 Culagosinga Sutta: Sutta 32


i 210


aware that 'consciousness is infinite/, we enter upon and abide
in the base of infinite consciousness... By completely surmount-
ing the base of infinite consciousness, aware that 'there is noth-
ing/ we enter upon and abide in the base of nothingness... By
completely surmounting the base of nothingness, we enter upon
and abide in the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
Venerable sir, this is another superhuman state. . .which we have
attained by surmounting the preceding abiding, by making that
abiding subside."

18. "Good, good Anuruddha. But is there any other super-
human state, a distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of
the noble ones, a comfortable abiding, which you have attained
by surmounting that abiding, by making that abiding subside?"

"Why not, venerable sir? Here, venerable sir, whenever we
want, by completely surmounting the base of neither-perception-
nor-non-perception, we enter upon and abide in the cessation of
perception and feeling. And our taints are destroyed by our see-
ing with wisdom. Venerable sir, this is another superhuman
state, a distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble
ones, a comfortable abiding, which we have attained by sur-
mounting the preceding abiding, by making that abiding sub-
side. And, venerable sir, we do not see any other comfortable
abiding higher or more sublime than this one."

"Good, good Anuruddha. There is no other comfortable abid-
ing higher or more sublime than that one."

19. Then, when the Blessed One had instructed, urged, roused,
and encouraged the venerable Anuruddha, the venerable
Nandiya, and the venerable Kimbila with a talk on the
Dhamma, he rose from his seat and departed.

20. After they had accompanied the Blessed One a little way
and turned back again, the venerable [210] Nandiya and the
venerable Kimbila asked the venerable Anuruddha: "Have we
ever reported to the venerable Anuruddha that we have
obtained those abidings and attainments that the venerable
Anuruddha, in the Blessed One's presence, ascribed to us up to
the destruction of the taints?"

"The venerable ones have never reported to me that they have
obtained those abidings and attainments. Yet by encompassing
the venerable ones' minds with my own mind, I know that they
have obtained those abidings and attainments. And deities have



The Shorter Discourse in Gosinga 305



a l s o reported to me: 'These venerable ones have obtained those
abidings and attainments/ Then I declared it when directly
questioned by the Blessed One."

21. Then the spirit Dlgha Parajana 356 went to the Blessed One.
After paying homage to the Blessed One, he stood at one side
and said: "It is a gain for the Vajjians, venerable sir, a great gain
for the Vajjian people that the Tathagata, accomplished and
fully enlightened, dwells among them and these three clansmen,
the venerable Anuruddha, the venerable Nandiya, and the ven-
erable Kimbila!" On hearing the exclamation of the spirit Dlgha
Parajana, the earth gods exclaimed: "It is a gain for the Vajjians,
a great gain for the Vajjian people that the Tathagata, accom-
plished and fully enlightened, dwells among them and these
three clansmen, the venerable Anuruddha, the venerable
Nandiya, and the venerable Kimbila!" On hearing the exclama-
tion of the earth gods, the gods of the heaven of the Four Great
Kings... the gods of the heaven of the Thirty- three... the Yama
gods... the gods of the Tusita heaven... the gods who delight in
creating. . .the gods who wield power over others' creations. . .the
gods of Brahma's retinue exclaimed: "It is a gain for the Vajjians,
a great gain for the Vajjian people that the Tathagata, accom-
plished and fully enlightened, dwells among them and these
three clansmen, the venerable Anuruddha, the venerable
Nandiya, and the venerable Kimbila!" Thus at that instant, at
that moment, those venerable ones were known as far as the
Brahma-world.

22. [The Blessed One said:] "So it is, Dlgha, so it is! And if the
clan from which those three clansmen went forth from the home
life into homelessness should remember them with confident
heart, that would lead to the welfare and happiness of that clan
for a long time. And if the retinue of the clan from which those
three clansmen went forth [2 11]... the village from which they
went forth... the town from which they went forth... the city
from which they went forth... the country from which those
three clansmen went forth from the home life into homelessness
should remember them with confident heart, that would lead to
the welfare and happiness of that country for a long time. If all
nobles should remember those three clansmen with confident
heart, that would lead to the welfare and happiness of the nobles
for a long time. If all brahmins... all merchants... all workers


306 Culagosinga Sutta: Sutta 31


i 211


should remember those three clansmen with confident heart,
that would lead to the welfare and happiness of the workers for
a long time. If the world with its gods, its Maras, and its
Brahmas, this generation with its recluses and brahmins, its
princes and its people, should remember those three clansmen
with confident heart, that would lead to the welfare and happi-
ness of the world for a long time. See, Dlgha, how those three
clansmen are practising for the welfare and happiness of the
many, out of compassion for the world, for the good, welfare
and happiness of gods and humans."

That is what the Blessed One said. The spirit Dlgha Parajana
was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.



32 Mahagosinga Sutta
The Greater Discourse in Gosinga


[212] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was
living in the Park of the Gosinga Sala-tree Wood together with a
number of very well-known elder disciples - the venerable
Sariputta, the venerable Maha Moggallana, the venerable Maha
Kassapa, the venerable Anuruddha, the venerable Revata, the
venerable Ananda, and other very well-known elder disciples.

2. Then, when it was evening, the venerable Maha Moggallana
rose from meditation, went to the venerable Maha Kassapa, and
said to him: "Friend Kassapa, let us go to the venerable Sari-
putta to listen to the Dhamma." - "Yes, friend," the venerable
Maha Kassapa replied. Then the venerable Maha Moggallana,
the venerable Maha Kassapa, and the venerable Anuruddha
went to the venerable Sariputta to listen to the Dhamma.

3. The venerable Ananda saw them going to the venerable
Sariputta to listen to the Dhamma. Thereupon he went to the
venerable Revata and said to him: "Friend Revata, those true
men are going to the venerable Sariputta to listen to the
Dhamma. Let us also go to the venerable Sariputta to listen to
the Dhamma." - "Yes, friend," the venerable Revata replied.
Then the venerable Revata and the venerable Ananda went to
the venerable Sariputta to listen to the Dhamma.

4. Tire venerable Sariputta saw the venerable Revata and the
venerable Ananda coming in the distance and said to the vener-
able Ananda: "Let the venerable Ananda come, welcome to the
venerable Ananda, the Blessed One's attendant, who is always
in the Blessed One's presence. Friend Ananda, the Gosinga Sala-
tree Wood is delightful, the night is moonlit, the sala trees are all
in blossom, and heavenly scents seem to be floating in the air.
What kind of bhikkhu, friend Ananda, could illuminate the
Gosinga Sala-tree Wood?"


307


308 Mahagosinga Sutta: Sutta 32


i 213


"Here, friend [213] Sariputta, a bhikkhu has learned much,
remembers what he has learned, and consolidates what he has
learned. Such teachings as are good in the beginning, good in
the middle, and good in the end, with the right meaning and
phrasing, and which affirm a holy life that is utterly perfect and
pure - such teachings as these he has learned much of, remem-
bered, mastered verbally, investigated with the mind, and pene-
trated well by view. And he teaches the Dhamma to the four
assemblies with well-rounded and coherent statements and
phrases for the eradication of the underlying tendencies. 357 That
kind of bhikkhu could illuminate this Gosinga Sala-tree Wood."

5. When this was said, the venerable Sariputta addressed the
venerable Revata thus: "Friend Revata, the venerable Ananda
has spoken according to his own inspiration. 358 Now we ask the
venerable Revata: Friend Revata, the Gosinga Sala-tree Wood is
delightful, the night is moonlit, the sala trees are all in blossom,
and heavenly scents seem to be floating in the air. What kind of
bhikkhu, friend Revata, could illuminate this Gosinga Sala-tree
Wood?"

"Here, friend Sariputta, a bhikkhu delights in solitary medita-
tion and takes delight in solitary meditation; he is devoted to
internal serenity of mind, does not neglect meditation, possesses
insight, and dwells in empty huts. 359 That kind of bhikkhu could
illuminate this Gosinga Sala-tree Wood."

6. When this was said, the venerable Sariputta addressed the
venerable Anuruddha thus: "Friend Anuruddha, the venerable
Revata has spoken according to his own inspiration. Now we
ask the venerable Anuruddha: Friend Anuruddha, the Gosinga
Sala-tree Wood is delightful... What kind of bhikkhu, friend
Anuruddha, could illuminate this Gosinga Sala-tree Wood?"

"Here, friend Sariputta, with the divine eye, which is purified
and surpasses the human, a bhikkhu surveys a thousand
worlds. Just as a man with good sight, when he has ascended to
the upper palace chamber, might survey a thousand wheel-rims,
so too, with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the
human, a bhikkhu surveys a thousand worlds. 360 That kind of
bhikkhu could illuminate this Gosinga Sala-tree Wood."

7. When this was said, the venerable Sariputta addressed the
venerable Maha Kassapa thus: "Friend Kassapa, the venerable
Anuruddha has spoken according to his own inspiration. Now


1214


The Greater Discourse in Gosinga 309


we a sk the venerable Maha Kassapa: Friend Kassapa, the Gosinga
gala-tree Wood is delightful... What kind of bhikkhu, friend
Kassapa, [214] could illuminate this Gosinga Sala-tree Wood?"

"Here, friend Sariputta, a bhikkhu is a forest dweller himself
and speaks in praise of forest dwelling; he is an almsfood eater
himself and speaks in praise of eating almsfood; he is a refuse-
rag wearer himself and speaks in praise of wearing refuse-rag
robes; he is a triple-robe wearer himself and speaks in praise of
wearing the triple robe; 361 he has few wishes himself and speaks
in praise of fewness of wishes; he is content himself and speaks
in praise of contentment; he is secluded himself and speaks in
praise of seclusion; he is aloof from society himself and speaks
in praise of aloofness from society; he is energetic himself and
speaks in praise of arousing energy; he has attained to virtue
himself and speaks in praise of the attainment of virtue; he has
attained to concentration himself and speaks in praise of the
attainment of concentration; he has attained to wisdom himself
and speaks in praise of the attainment of wisdom; he has
attained to deliverance himself and speaks in praise of the
attainment of deliverance; he has attained to the knowledge and
vision of deliverance himself and speaks in praise of the attain-
ment of the knowledge and vision of deliverance. That kind of
bhikkhu could illuminate this Gosinga Sala-tree Wood."

8. When this was said, the venerable Sariputta addressed the
venerable Maha Moggallana thus: "Friend Moggallana, the ven-
erable Maha Kassapa has spoken according to his own inspira-
tion. Now we ask the venerable Maha Moggallana: Friend
Moggallana, the Gosinga Sala-tree Wood is delightful... What
kind of bhikkhu, friend Moggallana, could illuminate this
Gosinga Sala-tree Wood?"



9. When this was said, the venerable Maha Moggallana
addressed the venerable Sariputta thus: "Friend Sariputta, we
have all spoken according to our own inspiration. Now we ask
the venerable Sariputta: Friend Sariputta, the Gosinga Sala-tree
Wood is delightful, the night is moonlit, the sala trees are all in


310 Mahagosinga Sutta: Sutta 32


i 216


blossom, and heavenly scents seem to be floating in the air.
What kind of bhikkhu, friend Sariputta, could illuminate this
Gosinga Sala-tree Wood?"

"Here, friend Moggallana, a bhikkhu wields mastery over his
mind, he does not let the mind wield mastery over him. In the
morning he abides in whatever abiding or attainment he wants
[215] to abide in during the morning; at mid-day he abides in
whatever abiding or attainment he wants to abide in at mid-day;
in the evening he abides in whatever abiding or attainment he
wants to abide in during the evening. Suppose a king or a king's
minister had a chest full of variously coloured garments. In the
morning he could put on whatever pair of garments he wanted
to put on in the morning; at mid-day he could put on whatever
pair of garments he wanted to put on at mid-day; in the evening
he could put on whatever pair of garments he wanted to put on
in the evening. So too, a bhikkhu wields mastery over his mind,
he does not let the mind wield mastery over him. In the morn-
ing... at mid-day... in the evening he abides in whatever abiding
or attainment he wants to abide in during the evening. That
kind of bhikkhu could illuminate this Gosinga Sala-tree Wood."

10. Then the venerable Sariputta addressed those venerable
ones thus: "Friends, we have all spoken according to our own
inspiration. Let us go to the Blessed One and report this matter
to him. As the Blessed One answers, so let us remember it." -
"Yes, friend," they replied. Then those venerable ones went to
the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, they sat down
at one side. The venerable Sariputta said to the Blessed One:

11. "Venerable sir, the venerable Revata and the venerable
Ananda came to me to listen to the Dhamma. I saw them com-
ing in the distance and [216] said to the venerable Ananda: 'Let
the venerable Ananda come, welcome to the venerable
Ananda. ..Friend Ananda, the Gosinga Sala-tree Wood is
delightful. ..What kind of bhikkhu, friend Ananda, could illumi-
nate this Gosinga Sala-tree Wood?' When asked, venerable sir,
the venerable Ananda replied: 'Here, friend Sariputta, a
bhikkhu has learned much... (as in §4 ),.. That kind of bhikkhu
could illuminate this Gosinga Sala-tree Wood/"

"Good, good, Sariputta. Ananda, speaking rightly, should
speak just as he did. For Ananda has learned much, remembers
what he has learned, and consolidates what he has learned.


The Greater Discourse in Gosinga 311


*218

Such teachings as are good in the beginning, good in the middle,
and good in the end, with the right meaning and phrasing, and
^rhich affirm a holy life that is utterly perfect and pure - such
teachings as these he has learned much of, remembered, mas-
tered verbally, investigated with the mind, and penetrated well
by view. And he teaches the Dhamma to the four assemblies
with well-rounded and coherent statements and phrases for the
eradication of the underlying tendencies."

12. "When this was said, venerable sir, I addressed the vener-
able Revata thus: 'Friend Revata...What kind of bhikkhu could
illuminate this Gosinga Sala-tree Wood?' And the venerable
Revata replied: 'Here, friend Sariputta, a bhikkhu delights in
solitary meditation . ..(as in §5 ). . .That kind of bhikkhu could illu-
minate this Gosinga Sala-tree Wood.'"

"Good, good, Sariputta. Revata, speaking rightly, should
speak just as he did. For Revata delights in solitary meditation,
takes delight in solitary meditation, is devoted to internal seren-
ity of mind, does not neglect meditation, possesses insight, and
dwells in empty huts." [217]

13. "When that was said, venerable sir, I addressed the vener-
able Anuruddha thus: 'Friend Anuruddha...What kind of
bhikkhu could illuminate this Gosinga Sala-tree Wood?' And
the venerable Anuruddha replied: 'Here, friend Sariputta, with
the divine eye.. .(as in §6 ). ..That kind of bhikkhu could illumi-
nate this Gosinga Sala-tree Wood.'"

"Good, good, Sariputta. Anuruddha, speaking rightly,
should speak just as he did. For with the divine eye, which is
purified and surpasses the human, Anuruddha surveys a thou-
sand worlds."

14. "When this was said, venerable sir, I addressed the vener-
able Maha Kassapa thus: 'Friend Kassapa... What kind of
bhikkhu could illuminate this Gosinga Sala-tree Wood?' And
the venerable Maha Kassapa replied: 'Here, friend Sariputta, a
bhikkhu is a forest-dweller himself. ..(as in §7 ). ..That kind of
bhikkhu could illuminate this Gosinga Sala-tree Wood.'" [218]

"Good, good, Sariputta. Kassapa, speaking rightly, should
speak just as he did. For Kassapa is a forest-dweller himself and
speaks in praise of forest dwelling. . .he has attained to the knowl-
edge and vision of deliverance himself and speaks in praise of the
attainment of the knowledge and vision of deliverance."


312 MahSgosinga Sutta: Sutta 32


i 219


15. "When this was said, venerable sir, I addressed the vener-
able Maha Moggallana thus: 'Friend Moggallana... What kind of
bhikkhu could illuminate this Gosinga Sala-tree Wood?' And
the venerable Maha Moggallana replied: 'Here, friend Sariputta,
two bhikkhus engage in a talk on the higher Dhamma...(as in
§8 )... That kind of bhikkhu could illuminate this Gosinga Sala-
tree Wood.'"

"Good, good, Sariputta. Moggallana, speaking rightly,
should speak just as he did. For Moggallana is one who talks on
the Dhamma."

16. When that was said, the venerable Maha Moggallana told
the Blessed One: "Then, venerable sir, I addressed the venerable
Sariputta thus: 'Friend Sariputta... What kind of bhikkhu could
illuminate this Gosinga Sala-tree Wood?' And the venerable
Sariputta replied: 'Here, friend Moggallana, a bhikkhu wields
mastery over his mind... [219] (as in §9 )...' That kind of bhikkhu
could illuminate this Gosinga Sala-tree Wood,"'

"Good, good, Moggallana. Sariputta, speaking rightly, should
speak just as he did. For Sariputta wields mastery over his
mind, he does not let the mind wield mastery over him. In the
morning he abides in whatever abiding or attainment he wants
to abide in during the morning; at mid-day he abides in whatev-
er abiding or attainment he wants to abide in at mid-day; in the
evening he abides in whatever abiding or attainment he wants
to abide in during the evening."

17. When this was said, the venerable Sariputta asked the
Blessed One: "Venerable sir, which of us has spoken well?"

"You have all spoken well, Sariputta, each in his own way.
Hear also from me what kind of bhikkhu could illuminate this
Gosinga Sala-tree Wood. Here, Sariputta, when a bhikkhu has
returned from his almsround, after his meal, he sits down, folds
his legs crosswise, sets his body erect, and establishing mindful-
ness in front of him, resolves: 'I shall not break this sitting posi-
tion until through not clinging my mind is liberated from the
taints.' That kind of bhikkhu could illuminate this Gosinga Sala-
tree Wood." 363

That is what the Blessed One said. Those venerable ones were
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


33 Mahagopalaka Sutta
The Greater Discourse on the Cowherd


[220] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One
was living at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." -
"Venerable sir/' they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, when a cowherd possesses eleven factors, he is
incapable of keeping and rearing a herd of cattle. What eleven?
Here a cowherd has no knowledge of form, he is unskilled in
characteristics, he fails to pick out flies' eggs, he fails to dress
wounds, he fails to smoke out the sheds, he does not know the
watering place, he does not know what it is to have drunk, he
does not know the road, he is unskilled in pastures, he milks
dry, and he shows no extra veneration to those bulls who are
fathers and leaders of the herd. When a cowherd possesses
these eleven factors, he is incapable of keeping and rearing a
herd of cattle.

3. "So too, bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu possesses eleven quali-
ties, he is incapable of growth, increase, and fulfilment in this
Dhamma and Discipline. What eleven? Here a bhikkhu has no
knowledge of form, he is unskilled in characteristics, he fails to
pick out flies' eggs, he fails to dress wounds, he fails to smoke
out the sheds, he does not know the watering place, he does not
know what it is to have drunk, he does not know the road, he is
unskilled in pastures, he milks dry, and he shows no extra ven-
eration to those elder bhikkhus of long-standing who have long
gone forth, the fathers and leaders of the Sangha.

4. "How has a bhikkhu no knowledge of form? Here a
bhikkhu does not understand as it actually is thus: 'All material
form of whatever kind consists of the four great elements and
the material form derived from the four great elements.' That is
how a bhikkhu has no knowledge of form.


313


314 Mahagopalaka Sutta: Sutta 33 i 221


5. "How is a bhikkhu unskilled in characteristics? Here a
bhikkhu does not understand as it actually is thus: 'A fool is
characterised by his actions; a wise man is characterised by his
actions/ That is how a bhikkhu is unskilled in characteristics. 364

6. "How does a bhikkhu fail to pick out flies 7 eggs? Here,
when a thought of sensual desire has arisen, a bhikkhu tolerates
it; he does not abandon it, remove it, do away with it, and anni-
hilate it. When a thought of ill will has arisen... When a thought
of cruelty has arisen... When evil unwholesome states have
arisen, a bhikkhu tolerates them; [221] he does not abandon
them, remove them, do away with them, and annihilate them.
That is how a bhikkhu fails to pick out flies' eggs.

7. "How does a bhikkhu fail to dress wounds? Here, on seeing
a form with the eye, a bhikkhu grasps at its signs and features.
Even though, when he leaves the eye faculty unguarded, evil
unwholesome states of covetousness and grief might invade
him, he does not practise the way of its restraint, he does not
guard the eye faculty, he does not undertake the restraint of the
eye faculty. On hearing a sound with the ear... On smelling an
odour with the nose. . .On tasting a flavour with the tongue. . .On
touching a tangible with the body... On cognizing a mind-object
with the mind, he grasps at its signs and features. Even though,
when he leaves the mind faculty unguarded, evil unwholesome
states of covetousness and grief might invade him, he does not
practise the way of its restraint, he does not guard the mind fac-
ulty, he does not undertake the restraint of the mind faculty.
That is how a bhikkhu fails to dress wounds.

8. "How does a bhikkhu fail to smoke out the sheds? Here a
bhikkhu does not teach others in detail the Dhamma as he has
learned it and mastered it. That is how a bhikkhu fails to smoke
out the sheds.

9. "How does a bhikkhu not know the watering place? Here a
bhikkhu does not go from time to time to those bhikkhus who
have learned much, who are well versed in the tradition, who
maintain the Dhamma, the Discipline, and the Codes, 365 and he
does not enquire and ask questions of them thus: 'How is this,
venerable sir? What is the meaning of this?' These venerable
ones do not reveal to him what has not been revealed, do not
clarify what is not clear, or remove his doubts about the numer-
ous things that give rise to doubt. That is how a bhikkhu does


i 222


The Greater Discourse on the Cowherd 315


not know the watering place.

10. "How does a bhikkhu not know what it is to have drunk?
Here, when the Dhamma and Discipline proclaimed by the
Tathagata is being taught, a bhikkhu does not gain inspiration in
the meaning, does not gain inspiration in the Dhamma, does not
gain gladness connected with the Dhamma. 366 That is how a
bhikkhu does not know what it is to have drunk.

11. "How does a bhikkhu not know the road? Here a bhikkhu
does not understand the Noble Eightfold Path as it actually is.
That is how a bhikkhu does not know the road.

12. "How is a bhikkhu unskilled in pastures? Here a bhikkhu
does not understand the four foundations of mindfulness as
they actually are. That is how [222] a bhikkhu is unskilled in
pastures. 367

13. "How does a bhikkhu milk dry? Here, when faithful
householders invite a bhikkhu to take as much as he likes of
robes, almsfood, resting places, and medicinal requisites, the
bhikkhu does not know moderation in accepting. That is how a
bhikkhu milks dry.

14. "How does a bhikkhu show no extra veneration to those
elder bhikkhus of long-standing who have long gone forth, the
fathers and leaders of the Sangha? Here a bhikkhu does not main-
tain bodily acts of loving-kindness both openly and privately
towards those elder bhikkhus; he does not maintain verbal acts
of loving-kindness towards them both openly and privately; he
does not maintain mental acts of loving-kindness towards them
both openly and privately. That is how a bhikkhu shows no extra
veneration to those elder bhikkhus of long-standing who have
long gone forth, the fathers and leaders of the Sangha.

"When a bhikkhu possesses these eleven qualities, he is inca-
pable of growth, increase, and fulfilment in this Dhamma and
Discipline.

15. "Bhikkhus, when a cowherd possesses eleven factors, he
is capable of keeping and rearing a herd of cattle. What eleven?
Here a cowherd has knowledge of form, he is skilled in charac-
teristics, he picks out flies' eggs, he dresses wounds, he smokes
out the sheds, he knows the watering place, he knows what it
is to have drunk, he knows the road, he is skilled in pastures,
he does not milk dry, and he shows extra veneration to those
bulls who are fathers and leaders of the herd. When a cowherd


316 Mahagopalaka Sutta: Suita 33


i 223


possesses these eleven factors, he is capable of keeping and rear-
ing a herd of cattle.

16. “So too, bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu possesses these eleven
qualities, he is capable of growth, increase, and fulfilment in this
Dhamma and Discipline. What eleven? Here a bhikkhu has
knowledge of form, he is skilled in characteristics, he picks out
flies' eggs, he dresses wounds, he smokes out the sheds, he
knows the watering place, he knows what it is to have drunk, he
knows the road, he is skilled in pastures, he does not milk dry,
and he shows extra veneration to those elder bhikkhus of long-
standing who have long since gone forth, the fathers and leaders
of the Sangha.

17. “How does a bhikkhu have knowledge of form? Here a
bhikkhu understands as it actually is thus: 'AH material form of
whatever kind consists of the four [223] great elements and the
material form derived from the four great elements/ That is how
a bhikkhu has knowledge of form.

18. “How is a bhikkhu skilled in characteristics? Here a
bhikkhu understands as it actually is thus: 'A fool is charac-
terised by his actions; a wise man is characterised by his actions/
That is how a bhikkhu is skilled in characteristics.

19. "How does a bhikkhu pick out flies' eggs? Here, when a
thought of sensual desire has arisen, a bhikkhu does not tolerate
it; he abandons it, removes it, does away with it, and annihi-
lates it. When a thought of ill will has arisen... When a thought
of cruelty has arisen... When evil unwholesome states have
arisen, a bhikkhu does not tolerate them; he abandons them,
removes them, does away with them, and annihilates them.
That is how a bhikkhu picks out flies' eggs.

20. "How does a bhikkhu dress wounds? Here, on seeing a
form with the eye, a bhikkhu does not grasp at its signs and fea-
tures. Since if he left the eye faculty unguarded, evil unwhole-
some states of covetousness and grief might invade him, he
practises the way of its restraint, he guards the eye faculty, he
undertakes the restraint of the eye faculty. On hearing a sound
with the ear . . .On smelling an odour with the nose . . . On tasting a
flavour with the tongue. ..On touching a tangible with the
body... On cognizing a mind-object with the mind, a bhikkhu
does not grasp at its signs and features. Since, if he left the mind
faculty unguarded, evil unwholesome states of covetousness


The Greater Discourse on the Cowherd 317


i 224


an d grief might invade him, he practises the way of its restraint,
ke guards the mind faculty, he undertakes the restraint of the
mind faculty. That is how a bhikkhu dresses wounds.

21. "How does a bhikkhu smoke out the sheds? Here a
bhikkhu teaches others in detail the Dhamma as he has learned
it and mastered it. That is how a bhikkhu smokes out the sheds.

22. "How does a bhikkhu know the watering place? Here a
bhikkhu goes from time to time to such bhikkhus who have
learned much, who are well versed in the tradition, who main-
tain the Dhamma, the Discipline, and the Codes, and he enquires
and asks questions of them thus: 'How is this, venerable sir?
What is the meaning of this?' These venerable ones reveal to him
what has not been revealed, clarify what is not clear, and remove
his doubts about the numerous things that give rise to doubt.
That is how a bhikkhu knows the watering place.

23. "How does [224] a bhikkhu know what it is to have drunk?
Here, when the Dhamma and Discipline proclaimed by the
Tathagata is being taught, a bhikkhu gains inspiration in the
meaning, gains inspiration in the Dhamma, gains gladness con-
nected with the Dhamma. That is how a bhikkhu knows what it
is to have drunk.

24. "How does a bhikkhu know the road? Here a bhikkhu
understands the Noble Eightfold Path as it actually is. That is
how a bhikkhu understands the road.

25. "How is a bhikkhu skilled in pastures? Here a bhikkhu
understands the four foundations of mindfulness as they actually
are. That is how a bhikkhu is skilled in pastures.

26. "How does a bhikkhu not milk dry? Here, when faithful
householders invite a bhikkhu to take as much as he likes of
robes, almsfood, resting places, and medicinal requisites, the
bhikkhu knows moderation in accepting. That is how a bhikkhu
does not milk dry.

27. "How does a bhikkhu show extra veneration to those elder
bhikkhus of long-standing who have long gone forth, the fathers
and leaders of the Sangha? Here a bhikkhu maintains bodily
acts of loving-kindness both openly and privately towards those
elder bhikkhus; he maintains verbal acts of loving-kindness
towards them both openly and privately; he maintains mental
acts of loving-kindness towards them both openly and private-
ly. That is how a bhikkhu shows extra veneration to those elder


318 MaMgopalaka Sutta: Sutta 33


i 224


bhikkhus of long-standing who have long gone forth, the fathers
and leaders of the Sangha.

"When a bhikkhu possesses these eleven qualities, he is capa-
ble of growth, increase, and fulfilment in this Dhamma and
Discipline."

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


34 Culagopalaka Sutta
The Shorter Discourse on the Cowherd


[225] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One
was living in the Vajjian country at Ukkacela on the banks of the
river Ganges. There he addressed the bhikkhus thus:
"Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir," they replied. The Blessed One
said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, there was once a foolish Magadhan cowherd
who, in the last month of the rainy season, in the autumn, with-
out examining the near shore or the further shore of the river
Ganges, drove his cattle across to the other shore in the Videhan
country at a place that had no ford. Then the cattle bunched
together in mid-stream in the river Ganges, and they met with
calamity and disaster. Why was that? Because that foolish
Magadhan cowherd, in the last month of the rainy season, in the
autumn, without examining the near shore or the further shore
of the river Ganges, drove his cattle across to the other shore in
the Videhan country at a place that had no ford.

3. "So too, bhikkhus, as to those recluses and brahmins who
are unskilled in this world and the other world, unskilled in
Mara's realm and what is outside Mara's realm, unskilled in the
realm of Death and what is outside the realm of Death - it will
lead to the harm and suffering for a long time of those who
think they should listen to them and place faith in them.

4. "Bhikkhus, there was once a wise Magadhan cowherd who,
in the last month of the rainy season, in the autumn, after exam-
ining the near shore and the further shore of the river Ganges,
drove his cattle across to the other shore in the Videhan country
at a place that had a ford. He made the bulls, the fathers and
leaders of the herd, enter first, and they breasted the stream of
the Ganges and got safely across to the further shore. He made
the strong cattle and the cattle to be tamed enter next, and they


319


320 Culagopalaka Sutta: Sutta 34


i226


too breasted the stream of the Ganges and got safely across to
the further shore. He made the heifers and young oxen enter
next, and they too breasted the stream of the Ganges and got
safely across to the further shore. He made the calves and the
feeble cattle enter next, and they too breasted the stream of the
Ganges and got safely across to the further shore. At the time
there was a tender calf just born, and being urged on by its
mother's lowing, it too breasted the stream of the Ganges and
got safely across to the further shore. Why was that? Because
that wise Magadhan cowherd, [226] in the last month of the
rainy season, in the autumn, after examining the near shore and
the further shore of the river Ganges, drove his cattle across to
the other shore in the Videhan country at a place that had a ford.

5. "So too, bhikkhus, as to those recluses and brahmins who
are skilled in this world and the other world, skilled in Mara's
realm and what is outside Mara's realm, skilled in the realm of
Death and what is outside the realm of Death - it will lead to the
welfare and happiness for a long time of those who think they
should listen to them and place faith in them.

6. "Bhikkhus, just as the bulls, the fathers and leaders of the
herd, breasted the stream of the Ganges and got safely across to
the further shore, so too, those bhikkhus who are arahants with
taints destroyed, who have lived the holy life, done what had to
be done, laid down the burden, reached the true goal, destroyed
the fetters of being, and are completely liberated through final
knowledge - by breasting Mara's stream they have gotten safely
across to the further shore.

7. "Just as the strong cattle and the cattle to be tamed breasted
the stream of the Ganges and got safely across to the further
shore, so too, those bhikkhus who, with the destruction of the
five lower fetters, will reappear spontaneously [in the Pure
Abodes] and there attain final Nibbana without ever returning
from that world - by breasting Mara's stream they will get safely
across to the further shore.

8. "Just as the heifers and young oxen breasted the stream of
the Ganges and got safely across to the further shore, so too, those
bhikkhus who, with the destruction of three fetters and with the
attenuation of lust, hate, and delusion, are once-returners,
returning once to this world to make an end of suffering - by
breasting Mara's stream they too will get safely across to the fur-


i22 7


The Shorter Discourse on the Cowherd 321


ther shore.

9. "Just as the calves and the feeble cattle breasted the stream
of the Ganges and got safely across to the further shore, so too,
those bhikkhus who, with the destruction of three fetters, are
stream-enterers, no longer subject to perdition, bound [for deliv-
erance!, headed for enlightenment - by breasting Mara's stream
they too will get safely across to the further shore.

10. "Just as that tender calf just born, being urged on by its
mother's lowing, also breasted the stream of the Ganges and got
safely across to the further shore, so too, those bhikkhus who are
Dhamma-followers and faith-followers - by breasting Mara's
stream they too will get safely across to the further shore. 368

11. "Bhikkhus, I am [227] skilled in this world and in the other
world, skilled in Mara's realm and in what is outside Mara's
realm, skilled in the realm of Death and in what is outside the
realm of Death. It will lead to the welfare and happiness for a
long time of those who think they should listen to me and place
faith in me."

12. That is what the Blessed One said. When the Sublime One
had said that, the Teacher said further.

"Both this world and the world beyond
Are well described by the one who knows.

And what is still in Mara's reach
And what is out of reach of Death.

Knowing directly all the world.

The Enlightened One who understands
Opened the door to the deathless state
By which Nibbana may be safely reached;

For Mara's stream is breasted now.

Its current blocked, its reeds removed;

Rejoice then, bhikkhus, mightily
And set your hearts where safety lies."


35 Culasaccaka Sutta
The Shorter Discourse to Saccaka


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Vesall in the Great Wood in the Hall with the Peaked Roof.

2. Now on that occasion Saccaka the Nigantha's son was stay-
ing at Vesall, a debater and a clever speaker regarded by many as
a saint. 369 He was making this statement before the Vesall assem-
bly: "I see no recluse or brahmin, the head of an order, the head
of a group, the teacher of a group, even one claiming to be
accomplished and fully enlightened, who would not shake, shiv-
er, and tremble, and sweat under the armpits if he were to
engage in debate with me. Even if I were to engage a senseless
post in debate, it would shake, shiver, and tremble if it were to
engage in debate with me, so what shall I say of a human being?"

3. Then, when it was morning, the venerable Assaji dressed,
and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Vesall for alms. 370
As Saccaka the Nigantha's son was walking and wandering for
exercise in Vesall, [228] he saw the venerable Assaji coming in
the distance and went up’ to him and exchanged greetings with
him. When this courteous and amiable talk was finished,
Saccaka the Nigantha's son stood at one side and said to him:

4. "Master Assaji, how does the recluse Gotama discipline his
disciples? And how is the recluse Gotama 's instruction usually
presented to his disciples?"

"This is how the Blessed One disciplines his disciples, Aggi-
vessana, and this is how the Blessed One's instruction is usually
presented to his disciples: 'Bhikkhus, material form is imperma-
nent, feeling is impermanent, perception is impermanent, forma-
tions are impermanent, consciousness is impermanent. Bhikkhus,
material form is not self, feeling is not self, perception is not self,
formations are not self, consciousness is not self. All formations
are impermanent; all things are not self.' 371 That is how the


322


The Shorter Discourse to Saccaka 323


' i 229

Blessed One disciplines his disciples, and that is how the Blessed
One's instruction is usually presented to his disciples."

"If this is what the recluse Gotama asserts, we hear indeed
what is disagreeable. Perhaps sometime or other we might meet
Master Gotama and have some conversation with him. Perhaps
we might detach him from that evil view."

5. Now at that time five hundred Licchavis had met together
in an assembly hall for some business or other. Then Saccaka the
Nigantha's son went to them and said: "Come forth, good
Licchavis, come forth! Today there will be some conversation
between me and the recluse Gotama. If the recluse Gotama
maintains before me what was maintained before me by one of
his famous disciples, the bhikkhu named Assaji, then just as a
strong man might seize a long-haired ram by the hair and drag
him to and drag him fro and drag him round about, so in debate
I will drag the recluse Gotama to and drag him fro and drag him
round about. Just as a strong brewer's workman might throw a
big brewer's sieve into a deep water tank, and taking it by the
corners, drag it to and drag it fro and drag it round about, so in
debate I will drag the recluse Gotama to and drag him fro and
drag him round about. Just as a strong brewer's mixer [229]
might take a strainer by the corners and shake it down and
shake it up and thump it about, so in debate I will shake the
recluse Gotama down and shake him up and thump him about.
And just as a sixty-year-old elephant might plunge into a deep
pond and enjoy playing the game of hemp-washing, so I shall
enjoy playing the game of hemp-washing with the recluse
Gotama. 372 Come forth, good Licchavis, come forth! Today there
will be some conversation between me and the reduse Gotama."

6. Thereupon some Licchavis said: "How can the recluse
Gotama refute Saccaka the Nigantha's son's assertions? On the
contrary, Saccaka the Nigantha's son will refute the recluse
Gotama's assertions." And some Licchavis said: "Who is
Saccaka the Nigantha's son that he could refute the Blessed
One's assertions? On the contrary, the Blessed One will refute
Saccaka the Nigantha's son's assertions." Then Saccaka the
Nigantha's son went with five hundred Licchavis to the Hall
with the Peaked Roof in the Great Wood.

7. Now on that occasion a number of bhikkhus were walking
up and down in the open. Then Saccaka the Nigantha's son


324 Culasaccaka Sutta: Sutta 35


i 230


went up to them and asked: "Where is Master Gotama staying
now, sirs? We want to see Master Gotama."

"The Blessed One has entered the Great Wood, Aggivessana,
and is sitting at the root of a tree for the day's abiding."

8. Then Saccaka the Nigantha's son, together with a large fol-
lowing of Licchavis, entered the Great Wood and went to the
Blessed One. He exchanged greetings with the Blessed One, and
after this courteous and amiable talk was finished, sat down at
one side. Some of the Licchavis paid homage to the Blessed One
and sat down at one side; some exchanged greetings with him,
and when this courteous and amiable talk was finished, sat
down at one side; some extended their hands in reverential
salutation towards the Blessed One and sat down at one side;
some pronounced their name and clan in the Blessed One's
presence and sat down at one side; some kept silent and sat
down at one side.

9. When Saccaka the Nigantha's son had sat down, he said to
the Blessed One: "I would like to question Master Gotama on a
certain point, if Master Gotama would grant me the favour of an
answer to the question."

"Ask what you like, Aggivessarta." [230]

"How does Master Gotama discipline his disciples? And how is
Master Gotama's instruction usually presented to his disciples?"

"This is how I discipline my disciples, Aggivessana, and this is
how my instruction is usually presented to my disciples:
'Bhikkhus, material form is impermanent, feeling is imperma-
nent, perception is impermanent, formations are impermanent,
consciousness is impermanent. Bhikkhus, material form is not
self, feeling is not self, perception is not self, formations are not
self, consciousness is not self. All formations are impermanent; all
things are not self.' That is the way I discipline my disciples, and
that is how my instruction is usually presented to my disciples."

10. "A simile occurs to me. Master Gotama."

"Explain how it occurs to you, Aggivessana," the Blessed
One said.

"Just as when seeds and plants, whatever their kind, reach
growth, increase, and maturation, all do so in dependence upon
the earth, based upon the earth; and just as when strenuous
works, whatever their kind, are done, all are done in depen-
dence upon the earth, based upon the earth - so too. Master



Gotama, a person has material form as self, and based upon
material form he produces merit or demerit. A person has feeling
a s self, and based upon feeling he produces merit or demerit. A
person has perception as self, and based upon perception he
produces merit or demerit. A person has formations as self, and
based upon formations he produces merit or demerit. A person
has consciousness as self, and based upon consciousness he pro-
duces merit or demerit."

11. "Aggivessana, are you not asserting thus: 'Material form is
my self, feeling is my self, perception is my self, formations are
my self, consciousness is my self'?"

"I assert thus. Master Gotama: 'Material form is my self, feel-
ing is my self, perception is my self, formations are my self, con-
sciousness is my self.' And so does this great multitude." 373

"What has this great multitude to do with you, Aggivessana?
Please confine yourself to your own assertion alone."

"Then, Master Gotama, I assert thus: 'Material form is my self,
feeling is my self, perception is my self, formations are my self,
consciousness is my self. ' " j

12. "In that case, Aggivessana, I shall ask you a question in
return. Answer it as you choose. [231] What do you think,
Aggivessana? Would a head-anointed noble king - for example,
King Pasenadi of Kosala or King Ajatasattu Vedehiputta of
Magadha - exercise the power in his own realm to execute those
who should be executed, to fine those who should be fined, and
to banish those who should be banished?"

"Master Gotama, a head-anointed noble king - for example.
King Pasenadi of Kosala or King Ajatasattu Vedehiputta of
Magadha - would exercise the power in his own realm to execute
those who should be executed, to fine those who should be fined,
and to banish those who should be banished. For even these [oli-
garchic] communities and societies such as the Vajjians and the
Mallians exercise the power in their own realm to execute those
who should be executed, to fine those who should be fined, and
to banish those who should be banished; so all tire more so should
a head-anointed noble king such as King Pasenadi of Kosala or
King Ajatasattu Vedehiputta of Magadha. He would exercise it.
Master Gotama, and he would be worthy to exercise it."

13. "What do you think, Aggivessana? When you say thus:
Material form is my self,' do you exercise any such power over



326 Culasaccaka Sutta: Sutta 35


i 232


that material form as to say: 'Let my form be thus; let my form 1
not be thus'?" 374 When this was said, Saccaka the Nigantha's son
was silent.

A second time the Blessed One asked the same question, and a
second time Saccaka the Nigantha's son was silent. Then the
Blessed One said to him: "Aggivessana, answer now. Now is not
the time to be silent. If anyone, when asked a reasonable ques-
tion up to the third time by the Tathagata, still does not answer,
his head splits into seven pieces there and then."

14. Now on that occasion a thunderbolt-wielding spirit hold-
ing an iron thunderbolt that burned, blazed, and glowed,
appeared in the air above Saccaka the Nigantha's son, thinking:

"If this Saccaka the Nigantha's son, when asked a reasonable
question up to the third time by the Blessed One, still does not
answer, I shall split his head into seven pieces here and now." 375
The Blessed One saw the thunderbolt-wielding spirit and so did
Saccaka the Nigantha's son. Then Saccaka the Nigantha's son
was frightened, alarmed, and terrified. [232] Seeking his shelter,
asylum, and refuge in the Blessed One, he said: "Ask me. Master
Gotama, I will answer."

15. "What do you think, Aggivessana? When you say thus:
'Material form is my self,' do you exercise any such power over
that material form as to say: 'Let my form be thus; let my form
not be thus'?" - "No, Master Gotama."

16. "Pay attention, Aggivessana, pay attention how you reply!
What you said before does not agree with what you said after-
wards, nor does what you said afterwards agree with what you
said before. What do you think, Aggivessana? When you say
thus: 'Feeling is my self,' do you exercise any power over that
feeling as to say: 'Let my feeling be thus; let my feeling not be
thus'?" - "No, Master Gotama."

17. "Pay attention, Aggivessana, pay attention how you reply!
What you said before does not agree with what you said after-
wards, nor does what you said afterwards agree with what you
said before. What do you think, Aggivessana? When you say
thus: 'Perception is my self,' do you exercise any power over
that perception as to say; 'Let my perception be thus; let my per-
ception not be thus'?" - "No, Master Gotama."

18. "Pay attention, Aggivessana, pay attention how you
reply! What you said before does not agree with what you said


The Shorter Discourse to Saccaka 327


afterwards, nor does what you said afterwards agree with what
oU said before. What do you think, Aggivessana? When you
ga y thus: 'Formations are my self/ do you exercise any such
power over those formations as to say: 'Let my formations be
thus; let my formations not be thus'?" - "No, Master Gotama."

19. "Pay attention, Aggivessana, pay attention how you
reply! What you said before does not agree with what you said
afterwards, nor does what you said afterwards agree with
what you said before. What do you think, Aggivessana? When
you say thus: 'Consciousness is my self/ do you exercise any
such power over that consciousness as to say: 'Let my con-
sciousness be thus; let my consciousness not be thus'?" - "No,
Master Gotama."

20. "Pay attention, Aggivessana, pay attention how you reply!
What you said before does not agree with what you said after-
wards, nor does what you said afterwards agree with what you
said before. What do you think, Aggivessana, is material form
permanent or impermanent?" - "Impermanent, Master Gotama."
- "Is what is impermanent suffering or happiness?" - "Suffering,
Master Gotama." - "Is what is impermanent, suffering, and sub-
ject to change fit to be regarded thus: 'This is mine, this I am,
[233] this is my self'?" - "No, Master Gotama."

"What do you think, Aggivessana? Is feeling permanent or
impermanent?... Is perception permanent or impermanent?...
Are formations permanent or impermanent?... Is consciousness
permanent or impermanent?" - "Impermanent, Master
Gotama." - "Is what is impermanent suffering or happiness?" -
"Suffering, Master Gotama." - "Is what is impermanent, suffer-
ing, and subject to change fit to be regarded thus: 'This is mine,
this I am, this is my self'?" - "No, Master Gotama."

21. "What do you think, Aggivessana? When one adheres to
suffering, resorts to suffering, holds to suffering, and regards
what is suffering thus: 'This is mine, this I am, this is my self/
could one ever fully understand suffering oneself or abide with
suffering utterly destroyed?"

"How could one. Master Gotama? No, Master Gotama."

*"What do you think, Aggivessana? That being so, do you
not adhere to suffering, resort to suffering, hold to suffering,
and regard what is suffering thus: 'This is mine, this I am, this
is my self'?"


328 Culasaccaka Sutta: Sutta 35


i 234


"How could I not. Master Gotama? Yes, Master Gotama."* 376

22. "It is as though a. man needing heartwood, seeking heart-
wood, wandering in search of heartwood, were to take a sharp
axe and enter the wood, and there he would see a large plantain
trunk, straight, young, with no fruit-bud core. Then he would
cut it down at the root, cut off the crown, and unroll the leaf-
sheaths; but as he went on unrolling the leaf sheaths, he would
never come even to any sapwood, let alone heartwood. So too,
Aggivessana, when you are pressed, questioned, and cross-
questioned by me about your own assertion, you turn out to be
empty, vacant, and mistaken. But it was you who made this
statement before the Vesali assembly: 'I see no recluse or brah-
min, the head of an order, the head of a group, the teacher of a
group, even one claiming to be accomplished and fully enlight-
ened, who would not shake, shiver, and tremble and sweat
under the armpits if he were to engage in debate with me. Even
if I were to engage a senseless post in debate, it would shake,
shiver, and tremble if it were to engage in debate with me, so
what shall I say of a human being?' Now there are drops of
sweat on your forehead and they have soaked through your
upper robe and fallen to the ground. But there is no sweat on
my body now." And the Blessed One uncovered his golden-
coloured body before the assembly. [234] When this was said,
Saccaka the Nigantha's son sat silent, dismayed, with shoulders
drooping and head down, glum, and without response.

23. Then Dummukha, the son of the Licchavis, seeing Saccaka
the Nigantha's son in such a condition, said to the Blessed One:
"A simile occurs to me, Master Gotama."

"Explain how it occurs to you, Dummukha."

"Suppose, venerable sir, not far from a village or town there
was a pond with a crab in it. And then a party of boys and girls
went out from the town or village to the pond, went into the
water, and pulled the crab out of the water and put it on dry
land. And whenever the crab extended a leg, they cut it off,
broke it, and smashed it with sticks and stones, so that the crab
with all its legs cut off, broken, and smashed, would be unable to
get back to the pond as before. So too, all Saccaka the Nigantha's
son's contortions, writhings, and vacillations have been cut off,
broken, and smashed by the Blessed One, and now he cannot get
near the Blessed One again for the purpose of debate."


The Shorter Discourse to Saccaka 329


i 235

24. When this was said, Saccaka the Nigantha's son told him:
"Wait, Dummukha, wait! We are not speaking with you, here
Y/e are speaking with Master Gotama."

[Then he said]: "Let that talk of ours be. Master Gotama. Like
that of ordinary recluses and brahmins, it was mere prattle, I
think. But in what way is a disciple of the recluse Gotama one
who carries out his instruction, who responds to his advice, who
has crossed beyond doubt, become free from perplexity, gained
intrepidity, and become independent of others in the Teacher's
Dispensation?" 377

"Here, Aggivessana, any kind of material form whatever,
whether past, future, or present, internal or external, gross or
subtle, inferior or superior, far or near - a disciple of mine sees
all material form as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: 'This
is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.' [235] Any kind of
feeling whatever... Any kind of perception whatever... Any kind
of formations whatever. ..Any kind of consciousness whatever,
whether past, future, or present, internal or external, gross or
subtle, inferior or superior, far or near - a disciple of mine sees
all consciousness as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: 'This
is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.' It is in this way
that a disciple of mine is one who carries out my instruction,
who responds to my advice, who has crossed beyond doubt,
become free from perplexity, gained intrepidity, and become
independent of others in the Teacher's Dispensation."

25. "Master Gotama, in what way is a bhikkhu an arahant
with taints destroyed, one who has lived the holy life, done
what had to be done, laid down the burden, reached the true
goal, destroyed the fetters of being, and is completely liberated
through final knowledge?"

"Here, Aggivessana, any kind of material form whatever,
whether past, future, or present, internal or external, gross or
subtle, inferior or superior, far or near - a bhikkhu has seen all
material form as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: 'This is
not mine, this I am not, this is not my self/ and through not
clinging he is liberated. Any kind of feeling whatever... Any
kind of perception whatever... Any kind of formations whatever
...Any kind of consciousness whatever, whether past, future, or
present, internal or external, gross or subtle, inferior or superior,
far or near - a bhikkhu has seen all consciousness as it actually is


330 Culasaccaka Suita: Sutta 35


i 236


with proper wisdom thus: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is
not my self,' and through not clinging he is liberated. It is in this
way that a bhikkhu is an arahant with taints destroyed, one who
has lived the holy life, done what had to be done, laid down the
burden, reached the true goal, destroyed the fetters of being,
and is completely liberated through final knowledge.

26. "When a bhikkhu's mind is thus liberated, he possesses
three unsurpassable qualities: unsurpassable vision, unsurpass-
able practice of the way, and unsurpassable deliverance. 378 When
a bhikkhu is thus liberated, he still honours, reveres, and vener-
ates the Tathagata thus: 'The Blessed One is enlightened and he
teaches the Dhamma for the sake of enlightenment. The Blessed
One is tamed and he teaches the Dhamma for taming oneself.
The Blessed One is at peace and he teaches the Dhamma for the
sake of peace. The Blessed One has crossed over and he teaches
the Dhamma for crossing over. The Blessed One has attained
Nibbana and he teaches the Dhamma for attaining Nibbana.'"

27. When this was said, Saccaka the Nigantha's son [236]
replied: "Master Gotama, we were bold and impudent in think-
ing we could attack Master Gotama in debate. A man might
attack a mad elephant and find safety, yet he could not attack
Master Gotama and find safety. A man might attack a blazing
mass of fire and find safety, yet he could not attack Master
Gotama and find safety. A man might attack a terrible poiso-
nous snake and find safety, yet he could not attack Master
Gotama and find safety. We were bold and impudent in think-
ing we could attack Master Gotama in debate.

"Let the Blessed One together with the Sangha of bhikkhus
consent to accept tomorrow's meal from me." The Blessed One
consented in silence.

28. Then, knowing that the Blessed One had consented,
Saccaka the Nigantha's son addressed the Licchavis: "Hear me,
Licchavis. The recluse Gotama together with the Sangha of
bhikkhus has been invited by me for tomorrow's meal. You may
bring to me whatever you think would be suitable for him."

29. Then, when the night had ended, the Licchavis brought
five hundred ceremonial dishes of milk rice as gifts of food.
Then Saccaka the Nigantha's son had good food of various
kinds prepared in his own park and had the time announced to
the Blessed One: "It is time. Master Gotama, the meal is ready."


The Shorter Discourse to Saccaka


30. Then, it being morning, the Blessed One dressed, and tak-
ing his bowl and outer robe, he went with the Sangha of
bhikkhus to the park of Saccaka the Nigantha's son and sat
down on the seat made ready. Then, with his own hands,
Saccaka the Nigantha's son served and satisfied the Sangha of
bhikkhus headed by the Buddha with the various kinds of good
food. When the Blessed One had eaten and had withdrawn his
hand from the bowl, Saccaka the Nigantha's son took a low seat,
sat down at one side, and said to the Blessed One: "Master
Gotama, may the merit and the great meritorious fruits of this
act of giving be for the happiness of the givers."

"Aggivessana, whatever comes about from giving to a recipi-
ent such as yourself - one who is not free from lust, not free
from hate, not free from delusion - [237] that will be for the
givers. And whatever comes about from giving to a recipient
such as myself - one who is free from lust, free from hate, free
from delusion - that will be for you." 379


36 Mahasaccaka Sutta
The Greater Discourse to Saccaka


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Vesali in the Great Wood in the Hall with the Peaked Roof.

2. Now on that occasion, when it was morning, the Blessed
One had finished dressing and had taken his bowl and outer
robe, desiring to go into Vesali for alms.

3. Then, as Saccaka the Nigantha's son was walking and wan-
dering for exercise, he came to the Hall with the Peaked Roof in
the Great Wood. 380 The venerable Ananda saw him coming in
the distance and said to the Blessed One: "Venerable sir, here
comes Saccaka the Nigantha's son, a debater and a clever
speaker regarded by many as a saint. He wants to discredit the
Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha. It would be good if the
Blessed One would sit down for a while out of compassion." 381
The Blessed One sat down on the seat made ready. Then
Saccaka the Nigantha's son went up to the Blessed One and
exchanged greetings with him. When this courteous and ami-
able talk was finished, he sat down at one side and said to the
Blessed One:

4. "Master Gotama, there are some recluses and brahmins
who abide pursuing development of body, but not development
of mind. 382 They are touched by bodily painful feeling. In the
past, when one was touched by bodily painful feeling, one's
thighs would become rigid, one's heart would burst, hot blood
would gush from one's mouth, and one would go mad, go out
of one's mind. So then the mind was subservient to the body,
the body wielded mastery over it. Why is that? [238] Because the
mind was not developed. But there are some recluses and brah-
mins who abide pursuing development of mind, but not devel-
opment of body. They are touched by mental painful feeling. Li
the past, when one was touched by mental painful feeling, one's


332


i 239


The Greater Discourse to Saccaka 333


thighs would become rigid, one's heart would burst, hot blood
would gush from one's mouth, and one would go mad, go out
of one's mind. So then the body was subservient to the mind,
the mind wielded mastery over it. Why is that? Because the
body was not developed. Master Gotama, it has occurred to me:
'Surely Master Gotama's disciples abide pursuing development
of mind, but not development of body.'"

5. "But, Aggivessana, what have you learned about develop-
ment of body?"

"Well, there are, for example, Nanda Vaccha, Kisa Sankicca,
Makkhali Gosala. 383 They go naked, rejecting conventions, lick-
ing their hands, not coming when asked, not stopping when
asked; they do not accept food brought or food specially made
or an invitation to a meal; they receive nothing from a pot, from
a bowl, across a threshold, across a stick, across a pestle, from
two eating together, from a pregnant woman, from a woman
giving suck, from a woman lying with a man, from where food is
advertised to be distributed, from where a dog is waiting, from
where flies are buzzing; they accept no fish or meat, they drink
no liquor, wine, or fermented brew. They keep to one house, to
one morsel; they keep to two houses, to two morsels... they keep
to seven houses, to seven morsels. They live on one saucerful a
day, on two saucerfuls a day... on seven saucerfuls a day. They
take food once a day, once every two days... once every seven
days, and so on up to once every fortnight; they dwell pursuing
the practice of taking food at stated intervals."

6. "But do they subsist on so little, Aggivessana?"

"No, Master Gotama, sometimes they consume excellent hard
food, eat excellent soft food, taste excellent delicacies, drink
excellent drinks. Thereby they again regain their strength, forti-
fy themselves, and become fat."

"What they earlier abandoned, Aggivessana, they later gather
together again. That is how there is increase and decrease of
this body. But what have you learned about development of
mind?" [239]

When Saccaka the Nigantha's son was asked by the Blessed
One about development of mind, he was unable to answer.

7. Then the Blessed One told him: "What you have just spo-
ken of as development of body, Aggivessana, is not develop-
ment of body according to the Dhamma in the Noble One's



334 Mahasaccaka Sutta: Sutta 36


i 240


Discipline. Since you do not know what development of body
is, how could you know what development of mind is? Never-
theless, Aggivessana, as to how one is undeveloped in body
and undeveloped in mind, listen and attend closely to what I
shall say." - "Yes, sir," Saccaka the Nigantha's son replied. The
Blessed One said this:

8. "How, Aggivessana, is one undeveloped in body and unde-
veloped in mind? Here, Aggivessana, pleasant feeling arises in
an untaught ordinary person. Touched by that pleasant feeling,
he lusts after pleasure and continues to lust after pleasure. That
pleasant feeling of his ceases. With the cessation of the pleasant
feeling, painful feeling arises. Touched by that painful feeling,
he sorrows, grieves, and laments, he weeps beating his breast
and becomes distraught. When that pleasant feeling has arisen
in him, it invades his mind and remains because body is not
developed. And when that painful feeling has arisen in him, it
invades his mind and remains because mind is not developed.
Anyone in whom, in this double manner, arisen pleasant feeling
invades his mind and remains because body is not developed,
and arisen painful feeling invades his mind and remains
because mind is not developed, is thus undeveloped in body
and undeveloped in mind.

9. “And how, Aggivessana, is one developed in body and
developed in mind? Here, Aggivessana, pleasant feeling arises
in a well-taught noble disciple. Touched by that pleasant feeling,
he does not lust after pleasure or continue to lust after pleasure.
That pleasant feeling of his ceases. With the cessation of the
pleasant feeling, painful feeling arises. Touched by that painful
feeling, he does not sorrow, grieve, and lament, he does not
weep beating his breast and become distraught. When that
pleasant feeling has arisen in him, it does not invade his mind
and remain because body is developed. And when that painful
feeling has arisen in him, it does not invade his mind and remain
because mind is developed. Anyone in whom, in this double
manner, arisen pleasant feeling [240] does not invade his mind
and remain because body is developed, and arisen painful feel-
ing does not invade his mind and remain because mind is devel-
oped, is thus developed in body and developed in mind." 384

10. "I have confidence in Master Gotama thus: 'Master
Gotama is developed in body and developed in mind.'"


i 241


The Greater Discourse to Saccaka 335


"Surely, Aggivessana, your words are offensive and discour-
teous, but still I will answer you. Since I shaved off my hair and
beard, put on the yellow robe, and went forth from the home life
into homelessness, it has not been possible for arisen pleasant
feeling to invade my mind and remain or for arisen painful feel-
ing to invade my mind and remain."

11. "Has there never arisen in Master Gotama a feeling so
pleasant that it could invade his mind and remain? Has there
never arisen in Master Gotama a feeling so painful that it could
invade his mind and remain?"

12. "Why not, Aggivessana? 385 Here, Aggivessana, before my
enlightenment, while I was still only an unenlightened Bodhi-
satta, I thought: 'Household life is crowded and dusty; life gone
forth is wide open. It is not easy, while living in a home, to lead
the holy life Utterly perfect and pure as a polished shell.
Suppose I shave off my hair and beard, put on the yellow robe,
and go forth from the home life into homelessness.'

13-16. "Later, while still young, a black-haired young man
endowed with the blessing of youth, in the prime of life... (as
Sutta 26, §§14-1 7)... And I sat down there thinking: 'This will
serve for striving.'

17. "Now these three similes occurred to me spontaneously,
never heard before. Suppose there were a wet sappy piece of
wood lying in water, and a man came with an upper fire-stick,
thinking: 'I shall light a fire, I shall produce heat.' What do you
think, Aggivessana? Could the man light a fire and produce
heat by taking the upper fire-stick and rubbing it against the wet
sappy piece of wood lying in the water?"

"No, Master Gotama. Why not? Because it is a wet sappy
piece of wood, [241] and it is lying in water. Eventually the man
would reap only weariness and disappointment."

"So too, Aggivessana, as to those recluses and brahmins who
still do not live bodily and mentally withdrawn from sensual
pleasures, and whose sensual desire, affection, infatuation,
thirst, and fever for sensual pleasures has not been fully aban-
doned and suppressed internally, even if those good recluses
and brahmins feel painful, racking, piercing feelings due to exer-
tion, they are incapable of knowledge and vision and supreme
enlightenment; and even if those good recluses and brahmins do
not feel painful, racking, piercing feelings due to exertion, they



336 Mahasaccaka Sutta: Sutta 36


i 242


are incapable of knowledge and vision and supreme enlighten-
ment. This was the first simile that occurred to me spontaneously,
never heard before.

18. "Again, Aggivessana, a second simile occurred to me
spontaneously, never heard before. Suppose there were a wet
sappy piece of wood lying on dry land far from water, and a
man came with an upper fire-stick, thinking: T shall light a fire, I
shall produce heat.' What do you think, Aggivessana? Could the
man light a fire and produce heat by taking the upper fire-stick
and rubbing it against the wet sappy piece of wood lying on dry
land far from water?"

"No, Master Gotama. Why not? Because it is a wet sappy
piece of wood, even though it is lying on dry land far from
water. Eventually the man would reap only weariness and dis-
appointment."

"So too, Aggivessana, as to those recluses and brahmins who
live bodily and mentally withdrawn from sensual pleasures, 386
but whose sensual desire, affection, infatuation, thirst, and fever
for sensual pleasures has not been fully abandoned and sup-
pressed internally, even if those good recluses and brahmins feel
painful, racking, piercing feelings due to exertion, they are inca-
pable of knowledge and vision and supreme enlightenment; and
even if those good recluses and brahmins do not feel painful,
racking, piercing feelings due to exertion, they are incapable of
knowledge and vision and supreme enlightenment. This was
the second simile that occurred to me spontaneously, never
heard before. *

19. "Again, Aggivessana, a third simile occurred to me [242]
spontaneously, never heard before. Suppose there were a dry
sapless piece of wood lying on dry land far from water, and a
man came with an upper fire-stick, thinking: 'I shall light a fire, I
shall produce heat.' What do you think, Aggivessana? Could the
man light a fire and produce heat by rubbing it against the dry
sapless piece of wood lying on dry land far from water?"

"Yes, Master Gotama. Why so? Because it is a dry sapless
piece of wood, and it is lying on dry land far from water."

"So too, Aggivessana, as to those recluses and brahmins who
live bodily and mentally withdrawn from sensual pleasures,
and whose sensual desire, affection, infatuation, thirst, and fever
for sensual pleasures has been fully abandoned and suppressed


The Greater Discourse to Saccaka 337



internally, even if those good recluses and brahmins feel
painful, racking, piercing feelings due to exertion, they are capa-
ble of knowledge and vision and supreme enlightenment; and
even if those good recluses and brahmins do not feel painful,
racking, piercing feelings due to exertion, they are capable of
knowledge and vision and supreme enlightenment. 387 This was
the third simile that occurred to me spontaneously, never heard
before. These are the three similes that occurred to me sponta-
neously, never heard before.

20. "I thought: 'Suppose, with my teeth clenched and my
tongue pressed against the roof of my mouth, I beat down, con-
strain, and crush mind with mind.' So, with my teeth clenched
and my tongue pressed against the roof of my mouth, I beat
down, constrained, and crushed mind with mind. While I did
so, sweat ran from my armpits. Just as a strong man might seize
a weaker man by the head or shoulders and beat him down,
constrain him, and crush him, so too, with my teeth clenched
and my tongue pressed against the roof of my mouth, I beat
down, constrained, and crushed mind with mind, and sweat ran
from my armpits. But although tireless energy was aroused in
me and unremitting mindfulness was established, my body was
overwrought [243] and uncalm because I was exhausted by the
painful striving. But such painful feeling that arose in me did
not invade my mind and remain. 388

21. "I thought: 'Suppose I practise the breathingless medita-
tion.' So I stopped the in-breaths and out-breaths through my
mouth and nose. While I did so, there was a loud sound of
winds coming out from my earholes. Just as there is a loud
sound when a smith's bellows are blown, so too, while I stopped
the in-breaths and out-breaths through my nose and ears, there
was a loud sound of winds coming out from my earholes. But
although tireless energy was aroused in me and unremitting
mindfulness was established, my body was overwrought and
uncalm because I was exhausted by the painful striving. But
such painful feeling that arose in me did not invade my mind
and remain.

22. "I thought: 'Suppose I practise further the breathingless
meditation.' So I stopped the in-breaths and out-breaths through
my mouth, nose, and ears. While I did so, violent winds cut
through my head. Just as if a strong man were splitting my head




a


338 Mahasaccaka Sutta: Sutta 36


i 244


open with a sharp sword, so too, while I stopped the in-breaths
and out-breaths through my mouth, nose, and ears, violent
winds cut through my head. But although tireless energy was
aroused in me and unremitting mindfulness was established,
my body was overwrought and uncalm because I was exhausted
by the painful striving. But such painful feeling that arose in me
did not invade my mind and remain.

23. "I thought: 'Suppose I practise further the breathingless
meditation.' So I stopped the in-breaths and out-breaths through
my mouth, nose, and ears. While I did so, there were violent
pains in my head. Just as if a strong man [244] were tightening a
tough leather strap around my head as a headband, so too,
while I stopped the in-breaths and out-breaths through my
mouth, nose, and ears, there were violent pains in my head. But
although tireless energy was aroused in me and unremitting
mindfulness was established, my body was overwrought and
uncalm because I was exhausted by the painful striving. But
such painful feeling that arose in me did not invade my mind
and remain.

24. "I thought: 'Suppose I practise further the breathingless
meditation.’ So I stopped the in-breaths and out-breaths through
my mouth, nose, and ears. While I did so, violent winds carved
up my belly. Just as if a skilled butcher or his apprentice were to
carve up an ox's belly with a sharp butcher's knife, so too, while
I stopped the in-breaths and out-breaths through my mouth,
nose, and ears, violent winds carved up my belly. But although
tireless energy was aroused in me and unremitting mindfulness
was established, my body was overwrought and uncalm because
I was exhausted by the painful striving. But such painful feeling
that arose in me did not invade my mind and remain.

25. "I thought: 'Suppose I practise further the breathingless
meditation.' So I stopped the in-breaths and out-breaths through
my mouth, nose, and ears. While I did so, there was a violent
burning in my body. Just as if two strong men were to seize a
weaker man by both arms and roast him over a pit of hot coals,
so too, while I stopped the in-breaths and out-breaths through
my mouth, nose, and ears, there was a violent burning in my
body. But although tireless energy was aroused in me and
unremitting mindfulness was established, my body was over-
wrought and uncalm because I was exhausted by the painful


i 246


The Greater Discourse to Saccaka 33 9


striving. But such painful feeling that arose in me did not invade
xny mind and remain.

26. "Now when [245] deities saw me, some said: 'The recluse
Gotama is dead/ Other deities said: 'The recluse Gotama is not
dead, he is dying.' And other deities said: 'The recluse Gotama
is not dead nor dying; he is an arahant, for such is the way ara-
hants abide.'

27. "I thought: 'Suppose I practise entirely cutting off food.'
Then deities came to me and said: 'Good sir, do not practise
entirely cutting off food. If you do so, we shall infuse heavenly
food into the pores of your skin and you will live on that.' I con-
sidered: 'If I claim to be completely fasting while these deities
infuse heavenly food into the pores of my skin and I live on that,
then I shall be lying.' So I dismissed those deities, saying: 'There
is no need.'

28. "I thought: 'Suppose I take very little food, a handful each
time, whether of bean soup or lentil soup or vetch soup or pea
soup.' So I took very little food, a handful each time, whether of
bean soup or lentil soup or vetch soup or pea soup. While I did
so, my body reached a state of extreme emaciation. Because of
eating so little my limbs became like the jointed segments of
vine stems or bamboo stems. Because of eating so little my back-
side became like a camel's hoof. Because of eating so little the
projections on my spine stood forth like corded beads. Because
of eating so little my ribs jutted out as gaunt as the crazy rafters
of an old roofless barn. Because of eating so little the gleam of
my eyes sank far down in their sockets, looking like the gleam of
water that has sunk far down in a deep well. Because of eating
so little my scalp shrivelled and withered as [246] a green bitter
gourd shrivels and withers in the wind and sun. Because of eat-
ing so little my belly skin adhered to my backbone; thus if I
touched my belly skin I encountered my backbone and if I
touched my backbone I encountered my belly skin. Because of
eating so little, if I urinated or defecated, I fell over on my face
there. Because of eating so little, if I tried to ease my body by
rubbing my limbs with my hands, the hair, rotted at its roots,
fell from my body as I rubbed.

29. "Now when people saw me, some said: 'The recluse Gotama
is black.' Other people said: 'The recluse Gotama is not black, he
is brown.' Other people said: 'The recluse Gotama is neither


340 Mahcisaccaka Suita: Suita 36


1247


black nor brown, he is golden-skinned.' So much had the clear,
bright colour of my skin deteriorated through eating so little.

30. "I thought: 'Whatever recluses or brahmins in the past
have experienced painful, racking, piercing feelings due to exer-
tion, this is the utmost, there is none beyond this. And whatever
recluses and brahmins in the future will experience painful,
racking, piercing feelings due to exertion, this is the utmost,
there is none beyond this. And whatever recluses and brahmins
at present experience painful, racking, piercing feelings due to
exertion, this is the utmost, there is none beyond this. But by this
racking practice of austerities I have not attained any super-
human states, any distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of
the noble ones. Could there be another path to enlightenment?'

31. “I considered: 'I recall that when my father the Sakyan was
occupied, while I was sitting in the cool shade of a rose-apple
tree, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unwholesome states, I entered upon and abided in the first
jhana, which is accompanied by applied and sustained thought,
with rapture and pleasure bom of seclusion. 389 Could that be the
path to enlightenment?' Then, following on that memory, came
the realisation: 'That is the path to enlightenment.'

32. "I thought: 'Why [247] am I afraid of that pleasure that has
nothing to do with sensual pleasures and unwholesome states?'
1 thought: 'I am not afraid of that pleasure since it has nothing to
do with sensual pleasures and unwholesome states.' 390

33. "I considered: ‘It is not easy to attain that pleasure with a
body so excessively emaciated. Suppose I ate some solid food -
some boiled rice and bread.' And I ate some solid food - some
boiled rice and bread. Now at that time five bhikkhus were
waiting upon me, thinking: 'If our recluse Gotama achieves
some higher state, he will inform us.' But when I ate the boiled
rice and bread, the five bhikkhus were disgusted and left me,
thinking: 'The recluse Gotama now lives luxuriously; he has
given up his striving and reverted to luxury.'

34. "Now when I had eaten solid food and regained my
strength, then quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unwholesome states, I entered upon and abided in the first
jhana, which is accompanied by applied and sustained thought,
with rapture and pleasure bom of seclusion. But such pleasant
feeling that arose in me did not invade my mind and remain. 391


i 249


The Greater Discourse to Saccaka 341


35-37. "With the stilling of applied and sustained thought, I
entered upon and abided in the second jhana...With the fading
away as well of rapture. . .1 entered upon and abided in the third
jhana...With the abandoning of pleasure and pain... I entered
upon and abided in the fourth jhana...But such pleasant feeling
that arose in me did not invade my mind and remain.

38. "When my concentrated mind was thus purified, bright,
unblemished, rid of imperfection, malleable, wieldy, steady,
and attained to imperturbability, [248] I directed it to knowl-
edge of the recollection of past lives. I recollected my manifold
past lives, that is, one birth, two births . ..(as Sutta 4, §27 ). ..Thus
with their aspects and particulars I recollected my manifold
past lives.

39. "This was the first true knowledge attained by me in the
first watch of the night. Ignorance was banished and true
knowledge arose, darkness was banished and light arose, as
happens in one who abides diligent, ardent, and resolute. But
such pleasant feeling that arose in me did not invade my mind
and remain.

40. "When my concentrated mind was thus purified, bright,
unblemished, rid of imperfection, malleable, wieldy, steady, and
attained to imperturbability, I directed it to knowledge of the
passing away and reappearance of beings... (as Sutta 4, §29)...
Thus with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the
human, I saw beings passing away and reappearing, inferior
and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and I
understood how beings pass on according to their actions.

41. "This was the second true knowledge attained by me in
the second watch of the night. Ignorance was banished and true
knowledge arose, [249] darkness was banished and light arose,
as happens in one who abides diligent, ardent, and resolute. But
such pleasant feeling that arose in me did not invade my mind
and remain.

42. "When my concentrated mind was thus purified, bright,
unblemished, rid of imperfection, malleable, wieldy, steady, and
attained to imperturbability, I directed it to knowledge of the
destruction of the taints. I directly knew as it actually is: 'This is
suffering';.. .'This is the origin of suffering';... 'This is the cessa-
tion of suffering';... 'This is the way leading to the cessation of
suffering';... 'These are the taints';... 'This is the origin of the


Mahasaccaka Sutta: Sutta 36


taints';... 'This is the cessation of the taints';... 'This is the way
leading to the cessation of the taints.'

43. "When I knew and saw thus, my mind was liberated from
the taint of sensual desire, from the taint of being, and from the
taint of ignorance. When it was liberated there came the knowl-
edge: 'It is liberated.' I directly knew: 'Birth is destroyed, the
holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done,
there is no more coming to any state of being.'

44. "This was the third true knowledge attained by me in the
third watch of the night. Ignorance was banished and true
knowledge arose, darkness was banished and light arose, as
happens in one who abides diligent, ardent, and resolute. But
such pleasant feeling that arose in me did not invade my mind
and remain.

45. "Aggivessana, I recall teaching the Dhamma to an assem-
bly of many hundreds. Perhaps each person thinks: 'The recluse
Gotama is teaching the Dhamma especially for me.' But it
should not be so regarded; the Tathagata teaches the Dhamma
to others only to give them knowledge. When the talk is fin-
ished, Aggivessana, then I steady my mind internally, quieten it,
bring it to singleness, and concentrate it on that same sign of
concentration as before, in which I constantly abide." 392

"This can be believed of Master Gotama, since he is accom-
plished and fully enlightened. But does Master Gotama recall
sleeping during the day?" 393

46. "I recall, Aggivessana, in the last month of the hot season,
on returning from my alfnsround, after my meal I lay out my
outer robe folded in four, and lying down on my right side, I fall
asleep mindful and fully aware."

"Some recluses and brahmins call that abiding in delusion.
Master Gotama." [250]

"It is not in such a way that one is deluded or undeluded,
Aggivessana. As to how one is deluded or undeluded, listen and
attend closely to what I shall say." - "Yes, sir," Saccaka the
Nigantha's son replied. The Blessed One said this:

47. "Him I call deluded, Aggivessana, who has not abandoned
the taints that defile, bring renewal of being, give trouble, ripen
in suffering, and lead to future birth, ageing, and death; for it is
with the non-abandoning of the taints that one is deluded. Him I
call undeluded who has abandoned the taints that defile, bring


i 251


The Greater Discourse to Saccaka 343


renewal of being, give trouble, ripen in suffering, and lead to
future birth, ageing, and death; for it is with the abandoning of
the taints that one is undeluded. The Tathagata, Aggivessana,
has abandoned the taints that defile, bring renewal of being,
give trouble, ripen in suffering, and lead to future birth, ageing,
and death; he has cut them off at the root, made them like a
palm stump, done away with them so that they are no longer
subject to future arising. Just as a palm tree whose crown is cut
off is incapable of further growth, so too, the Tathagata has
abandoned the taints that defile... done away with them so that
they are no longer subject to future arising."

48. When this was said, Saccaka the Nigantha's son said: "It is
wonderful. Master Gotama, it is marvellous how when Master
Gotama is spoken to offensively again and again, assailed by
discourteous courses of speech, the colour of his skin brightens
and the colour of his face clears, as is to be expected of one who
is accomplished and fully enlightened. I recall. Master Gotama,
engaging Purana Kassapa in debate, and then he prevaricated,
led the talk aside, and showed anger, hate, and bitterness. But
when Master Gotama is spoken to offensively again and again,
assaulted by discourteous courses of speech, the colour of his
skin brightens and the colour of his face clears, as is to be
expected of one who is accomplished and fully enlightened. I
recall, Master Gotama, engaging Makkhali Gosala...Ajita
Kesakambalin...Pakudha Kaccayana...Sanjaya Belatthiputta...
the Nigantha Nataputta in debate, [251] and then he prevaricated,
led the talk aside, and showed anger, hate, and bitterness. But
when Master Gotama is spoken to offensively again and again,
assailed by discourteous courses of speech, the colour of his skin
brightens and the colour of his face clears, as is to be expected of
one who is accomplished and fully enlightened. And now,
Master Gotama, we depart. We are busy and have much to do."

"Now is the time, Aggivessana, to do as you think fit."

Then Saccaka the Nigantha's son, having delighted and
rejoiced in the Blessed One's words, got up from his seat and
departed. 394


37 Culatanhasankhaya Sutta
The Shorter Discourse on the
Destruction of Craving


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in the Eastern Park, in the Palace of Migara's
Mother.

2. Then Sakka, ruler of gods, went to the Blessed One, and
after paying homage to him, he stood at one side and asked:
"Venerable sir, how in brief is a bhikkhu liberated by the
destruction of craving, one who has reached the ultimate end,
the ultimate security from bondage, the ultimate holy life, the
ultimate goal, one who is foremost among gods and
humans?" 395

3. "Here, ruler of gods, a bhikkhu has heard that nothing is
worth adhering to. When a bhikkhu has heard that nothing is
worth adhering to, he directly knows everything; having directly
known everything, he fully understands everything; having
fully understood everything, whatever feeling he feels, whether
pleasant or painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant, he abides
contemplating impermanence in those feelings, contemplating
fading away, contemplating cessation, contemplating relin-
quishment. Contemplating thus, he does not cling to anything in
the world. When he does not cling, he is not agitated. When he
is not agitated, he personally attains Nibbana. 396 [252] He under-
stands: 'Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had
to be done has been done, there is no more coming to any state
of being/ Briefly, it is in this way, ruler of gods, that a bhikkhu
is liberated by the destruction of craving, one who has reached
the ultimate end, the ultimate security from bondage, the ulti-
mate holy life, the ultimate goal, one who is foremost among
gods and humans."

4. Then Sakka, ruler of gods, delighting and rejoicing in the


344


1253


The Shorter Discourse on the Destruction of Craving 345


Blessed One's words, paid homage to the Blessed One, and
keeping him on his right, he vanished at once.

5. Now on that occasion the venerable Maha Moggallana was
sitting not far from the Blessed One. Then he considered: "Did
that spirit penetrate to the meaning of the Blessed One’s words
when he rejoiced, or did he not? Suppose I found out whether
he did or not."

6. Then, just as quickly as a strong man might extend his
flexed arm or flex his extended arm, the venerable Maha
Moggallana vanished from the Palace of Migara's Mother in the
Eastern Park and appeared among the gods of the Thirty-three.

7. Now on that occasion Sakka, ruler of gods, was furnished
and endowed a hundredfold with the five kinds of heavenly
music, and he was enjoying it in the Pleasure Park of the Single
Lotus. When he saw the venerable Maha Moggallana coming in
the distance, he dismissed the music, went to the venerable Maha
Moggallana, and said to him: "Come, good sir Moggallana!
Welcome, good sir Moggallana! It is long, good sir Moggallana,
since you found am opportunity to come here. Sit down, good sir
Moggallana; this seat is ready."

The venerable Maha Moggallana sat down on the seat made
ready, and Sakka took a low seat and sat down at one side. The
venerable Maha Moggallana then asked him:

8. "Kosiya, 397 how did the Blessed One state to you in brief
deliverance through the destruction of craving? It would be
good if we might also get to hear that statement."

"Good sir Moggallana, we are so busy, we have so much to
do, not only with our own business, but also with the business
of the gods of the Thirty-three. Besides, good sir Moggallana,
what is well heard, well learned, [253] well attended to, well
remembered, does not vanish all of a sudden. Good sir
Moggallana, it once happened that war broke out between the
gods and the titans. 398 In that war the gods won and the titans
were defeated. When I had won that war and returned from it
as a conqueror, I had the Vejayanta Palace built. Good sir
Moggallana, the Vejayanta Palace has a hundred towers, and
each tower has seven hundred upper chambers, and each upper
chamber has seven nymphs, and each nymph has seven maids.
Would you like to see the loveliness of the Vejayanta Palace,


346 CulatanhMsankhaya Sutta: Sutta 37


i 254


good sir Moggallana?" The venerable Maha Moggallana con-
sented in silence.

9. Then Sakka, ruler of gods, and the divine King Vessavana 399
went to the Vejayanta Palace, giving precedence to the venerable
Maha Moggallana. When the maids of Sakka saw the venerable
Maha Moggallana coming in the distance, they were embar-
rassed and ashamed and they went each into their own rooms.
Just as a daughter-in-law is embarrassed and ashamed on seeing
her father-in-law, so too, when the maids of Sakka saw the ven-
erable Maha Moggallana coming, they were embarrassed and
ashamed and they went each into their own rooms.

10. Then Sakka, ruler of gods, and the divine King Vessavana
had the venerable Maha Moggallana walk all over and explore
the Vejayanta Palace: "See, good sir Moggallana, this loveliness
of the Vejayanta Palace! See, good sir Moggallana, this loveli-
ness of the Vejayanta Palace!"

"It does the venerable Kosiya credit as one who has formerly
made merit; and whenever human beings see anything lovely,
they say: 'Sirs, it does credit to the gods of the Thirty-three!' It
does the venerable Kosiya credit as one who has formerly
made merit.”

11. Then the venerable Maha Moggallana considered thus:
"This spirit is living much too negligently. What if I stirred up a
sense of urgency in him?" Then the venerable Maha Moggallana
performed such a feat of supernormal power that with the point
of his toe he made the Vejayanta Palace shake and quake and
tremble. 400 [254] Sakka and the divine King Vessavana and the
gods of the Thirty-three were filled with wonder and amaze-
ment, and they said: "Sirs, it is wonderful, it is marvellous, what
power and might the recluse has, that with the point of his toe
he makes the heavenly region shake and quake and tremble!"

12. When the venerable Maha Moggallana knew that Sakka,
ruler of the gods, was stirred to a sense of urgency with his
hair standing on end, he asked him: "Kosiya, how did the
Blessed One state to you in brief deliverance through the
destruction of craving? It would be good if we might also get to
hear that statement."

"Good sir Moggallana, I went to the Blessed One, and after
paying homage to him, I stood at one side and said: 'Venerable
sir,... [as in §2]... of gods and humans?' When this was said, good


i 255


The Shorter Discourse on the Destruction of Craving 347


sir Moggallana, the Blessed One told me: 'Here, ruler of gods,...
[as in §3]... of gods and humans.' That is how the Blessed One
stated to me in brief deliverance through the destruction of crav-
ing, good sir Moggallana."

13. Then the venerable Maha Moggallana delighted and
rejoiced in the words of Sakka, ruler of gods. [255] Then, just as
quickly as a strong man might extend his flexed arm or flex his
extended arm, he vanished from among the gods of the Thirty-
three and appeared in the Eastern Park in the Palace of Migara's
Mother.

14. Then, soon after the venerable Maha Moggallana had
gone, the attendants of Sakka, ruler of gods, asked him: "Good
sir, was that your teacher, the Blessed One?" - "No, good sirs,
that was not my teacher, the Blessed One. That was one of my
companions in the holy life, tire venerable Maha Moggallana." 401
- "Good sir, it is a gain for you that your companion in the holy
life has such power and might. Oh, how much more so that the
Blessed One is your teacher!"

15. Then the venerable Maha Moggallana went to the Blessed
One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side
and asked him: "Venerable sir, does the Blessed One recall stat-
ing in brief - to a certain one of the renowned spirits with a great
following - deliverance through the destruction of craving?"

"I do recall doing so, Moggallana. Here Sakka, ruler of gods,
came to me, and after paying homage to me, he stood at one
side and asked: 'Venerable sir, how in brief is a bhikkhu liberat-
ed by the destruction of craving, one who has reached the ulti-
mate end, the ultimate security from bondage, the ultimate holy
life, the ultimate goal, one who is foremost among gods and
humans?' When this was said, I told him: 'Here, ruler of gods, a
bhikkhu has heard that nothing is worth adhering to. When a
bhikkhu has heard that nothing is worth adhering to, he directly
knows everything; having directly known everything, he fully
understands everything; having fully understood everything,
whatever feeling he feels, whether pleasant or painful or neither-
painful-nor-pleasant, he abides contemplating impermanence in
those feelings, contemplating fading away, contemplating cessa-
tion, contemplating relinquishment. Contemplating thus, he
does not cling to anything in the world. When he does not cling,
he is not agitated. When he is not agitated, he personally attains


348 Culatanhasankhaya Sutta: Sutto 37


i 254


Nibbana. He understands: "Birth is destroyed, the holy life has
been lived, [256] what had to be done has been done, there is no
more coming to any state of being." Briefly, it is in this way,
ruler of gods, that a bhikkhu is liberated by the destruction of
craving. . .one who is foremost among gods and humans.' That is
how I recall stating in brief to Sakka, ruler of gods, deliverance
through the destruction of craving."

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Maha
Moggallana was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's
words.



38 Mahatanhasankhaya Sutta
The Greater Discourse on the
Destruction of Craving


(setting)

1. Thus have I. heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Savatthi in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.

2. Now on that occasion a pernicious view had arisen in a
bhikkhu named Sati, son of a fisherman, thus: "As I understand
the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One, it is this same con-
sciousness that runs and wanders through the round of rebirths,
not another." 402

3. Several bhikkhus, having heard about this, went to the
bhikkhu Sati and asked him: "Friend Sati, is it true that such a
pernicious view has arisen in you?"

"Exactly so, friends. As I understand the Dhamma taught by
the Blessed One, it is this same consciousness that runs and
wanders through the round of rebirths, not another."

Then those bhikkhus, desiring to detach him from that perni-
cious view, pressed and questioned and cross-questioned him
thus: "Friend Sati, do not say so. Do not misrepresent the Blessed
One; it is not good to misrepresent the Blessed One. The Blessed
One would not speak thus. For in many discourses the Blessed
One has stated consciousness to be dependently arisen, [257] since
without a condition there is no origination of consciousness."

Yet although pressed and questioned and cross-questioned by
those bhikkhus in this way, the bhikkhu Sati, son of a fisherman,
still obstinately adhered to that pernicious view and continued
to insist upon it.

4. Since the bhikkhus were unable to detach him from that
pernicious view, they went to the Blessed One, and after paying


349


350 MaMtanhasankhaya Sutta: Sutta 38


i 258


homage to him, they sat down at one side and told him all that
had occurred, adding: "Venerable sir, since we could not detach
the bhikkhu Sati, son of a fisherman, from this pernicious view,
we have reported this matter to the Blessed One."

5. Then the Blessed One addressed a certain bhikkhu thus:
"Come, [258] bhikkhu, tell the bhikkhu Sati, son of a fisherman,
in my name that the Teacher calls him." - "Yes, venerable sir,"
he replied, and he went to the bhikkhu Sati and told him: "The
Teacher calls you, friend Sati."

"Yes, friend," he replied, and he went to the Blessed One, and
after paying homage to him, sat down at one side. The Blessed
One then asked him: "Sati, is it true that the following perni-
cious view has arisen in you: 'As I understand the Dhamma
taught by the Blessed One, it is this same consciousness that
runs and wanders through the round of rebirths, not another'?"

"Exactly so, venerable sir. As I understand the Dhamma
taught by the Blessed One, it is this same consciousness that
runs and wanders through the round of rebirths, not another."

"What is that consciousness, Sati?"

"Venerable sir, it is that which speaks and feels and experi-
ences here and there the result of good and bad actions." 403

"Misguided man, to whom have you ever known me to teach
the Dhamma in that way? Misguided man, in many discourses
have I not stated consciousness to be dependency arisen, since
without a condition there is no origination of consciousness? But
you, misguided man, have misrepresented us by your wrong
grasp and injured yourself'and stored up much demerit; for this
will lead to your harm and suffering for a long time."

6. Then the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus:
"Bhikkhus, what do you think? Has this bhikkhu Sati, son of a
fisherman, kindled even a spark of wisdom in this Dhamma and
Discipline?"

"How could he, venerable sir? No, venerable sir."

When this was said, the bhikkhu Sati, son of a fisherman, sat
silent, dismayed, with shoulders drooping and head down, glum,
and without response. Then, knowing this, the Blessed One told
him: "Misguided man, you will be recognised by your own per-
nicious view. I shall question the bhikkhus on this matter."

7. Then the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus:
"Bhikkhus, do you understand the Dhamma taught by me as



The Greater Discourse on the Destruction of Craving 351


this bhikkhu Sati, [259] son of a fisherman, does when he mis-
r epresents us by his wrong grasp and injures himself and stores
u p much demerit?"

"No, venerable sir. For in many discourses the Blessed One
has stated consciousness to be dependently arisen, since without
a condition there is no origination of consciousness."

"Good, bhikkhus. It is good that you understand the Dhamma
taught by me thus. For in many discourses I have stated con-
sciousness to be dependently arisen, since without a condition
there is no origination of consciousness. But this bhikkhu Sati,
son of a fisherman, misrepresents us by his wrong grasp and
injures himself and stores up much demerit; for this will lead to
the harm and suffering of this misguided man for a long time.


(CONDITIONALITY OF CONSCIOUSNESS)

8. "Bhikkhus, consciousness is reckoned by the particular
condition dependent upon which it arises. When consciousness
arises dependent on the eye and forms, it is reckoned as eye-
consciousness; when consciousness arises dependent on the ear
and sounds, it is reckoned as ear-consciousness; when con-
sciousness arises dependent on the nose and odours, [260] it is
reckoned as nose-consciousness; when consciousness arises
dependent on the tongue and flavours, it is reckoned as tongue-
consciousness; when consciousness arises dependent on the
body and tangibles, it is reckoned as body-consciousness; when
consciousness arises dependent on the mind and mind-objects,
it is reckoned as mind-consciousness. Just as fire is reckoned by
the particular condition dependent on which it burns - when
fire bums dependent on logs, it is reckoned as a log fire; when
fire burns dependent on faggots, it is reckoned as a faggot fire;
when fire bums dependent on grass, it is reckoned as a grass
fire; when fire burns dependent on cowdung, it is reckoned as a
cowdung fire; when fire burns dependent on chaff, it is reckoned
as a chaff tire; when fire burns dependent on rubbish, it is reck-
oned as a rubbish fire - so too, consciousness is reckoned by the
particular condition dependent on which it arises. 404 When con-
sciousness arises dependent on the eye and forms, it is reckoned
as eye-consciousness... when consciousness arises dependent on
tire mind and mind-objects, it is reckoned as mind-consciousness.


352 Mahatanhasankhaya Sutta: Sutta 38


i 260


(general questionnaire on being)

9. "Bhikkhus, do you see: 'This has come to be'?" 405 - "Yes, ven-
erable sir." - "Bhikkhus, do you see: 'Its origination occurs with
that as nutriment'?" - "Yes, venerable sir." - "Bhikkhus, do you
see: 'With the cessation of that nutriment, what has come to be is
subject to cessation’?" - "Yes, venerable sir."

10. "Bhikkhus, does doubt arise when one is uncertain thus:
'Has this come to be or not'?" - "Yes, venerable sir." -
"Bhikkhus, does doubt arise when one is uncertain thus: 'Does
its origination occur with that as nutriment or not'?" - "Yes,
venerable sir." - "Bhikkhus, does doubt arise when one is uncer-
tain thus: 'With the cessation of that nutriment, is what has
come to be subject to cessation or not’?" - "Yes, venerable sir."

11. "Bhikkhus, is doubt abandoned in one who sees as it actu-
ally is with proper wisdom thus: 'This has come to be'?" - "Yes,
venerable sir." - "Bhikkhus, is doubt abandoned in one who sees
as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: 'Its origination occurs
with that as nutriment'?" - "Yes, venerable sir." - "Bhikkhus, is
doubt abandoned in one who sees as it actually is with proper
wisdom thus: 'With the cessation of that nutriment, what has
come to be is subject to cessation'?" - "Yes, venerable sir."

12. "Bhikkhus, are you free from doubt here: 'This has come to
be'?" - "Yes, venerable sir." - "Bhikkhus, are you free from
doubt here: 'Its origination occurs with that as nutriment'?" -
"Yes, venerable sir." - "Bhikkhus, are you free from doubt here:
'With the cessation of that nutriment, what has come to be is
subject to cessation'?" - "Yes, venerable sir."

13. "Bhikkhus, has it been seen well by you as it actually is
with proper wisdom thus: 'This has come to be'?" - "Yes, vener-
able sir." - "Bhikkhus, has it been seen well by you as it actually
is with proper wisdom thus: 'Its origination occurs with that as
nutriment'?" - "Yes, venerable sir." - "Bhikkhus, has it been
seen well by you as it actually is with proper wisdom thus:
'With the cessation of that nutriment, what has come to be is
subject to cessation'?" - "Yes, venerable sir."

14. "Bhikkhus, purified and bright as this view is, if you
adhere to it, cherish it, treasure it, and treat it as a possession,
would you then understand the Dhamma that has been taught
as similar to a raft, being for the purpose of crossing over, not



i 261


The Greater Discourse on the Destruction of Craving 353


for the purpose of grasping?" 406 - "No, venerable sir." - "Bhik-
Ichus, purified and bright as this view is, [261] if you do not
adhere to it, cherish it, treasure it, and treat it as a possession,
would you then understand the Dhamma that has been taught
as similar to a raft, being for the purpose of crossing over, not
for the purpose of grasping?" - "Yes, venerable sir."

(NUTRIMENT AND DEPENDENT ORIGINATION)

15. "Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of nutriment for the
maintenance of beings that already have come to be and for the
support of those seeking a new existence. What four? They are:
physical food as nutriment, gross or subtle; contact as the second;
mental volition as the third; and consciousness as the fourth. 407

16. "Now, bhikkhus, these four kinds of nutriment have what
as their source, what as their origin, from what are they born
and produced? These four kinds of nutriment have craving as
their source, craving as their origin; they are born and produced
from craving. And this craving has what as its source...?
Craving has feeling as its source... And this feeling has what as
its source...? Feeling has contact as its source... And this contact
has what as its source...? Contact has the sixfold base as its
source... And this sixfold base has what as its source...? The six-
fold base has mentality-materiality as its source. ..And this
mentality-materiality has what as its source...? Mentality-
materiality has consciousness as its source... And this conscious-
ness has what as its source...? Consciousness has formations as
its source... And these formations have what as their source,
what as their origin, from what are they born and produced?
Formations have ignorance as their source, ignorance as their
origin; they are born and produced from ignorance.

(FORWARD EXPOSITION ON ARISING)

17. "So, bhikkhus, with ignorance as condition, formations [come
to be]; with formations as condition, consciousness; with con-
sciousness as condition, mentality-materiality; with mentality-
materiality as condition, the sixfold base; with the sixfold base
as condition, contact; with contact as condition, feeling; with
feeling as condition, craving; with craving as condition, clinging;


354 MaMtanMsankhaya Sutta: Sutta 38


i 262


with clinging as condition, being; with being as condition, birth;
with birth as condition, ageing and death, sorrow, lamentation,
pain, grief, and despair come to be. Such is the origin of this
whole mass of suffering.

(reverse order questionnaire on arising)

18. "'With birth as condition, ageing and death': so it was said.
Now, bhikkhus, do ageing and death have birth as condition or
not, or how do you take it in this case?"

"Ageing and death have birth as condition, venerable sir. Thus
we take it in this case: 'With birth as condition, ageing and death.'"

"'With being as condition, birth': so it was said. Now,
bhikkhus, does birth have being as condition or not, or how do
you take it in this case?"

"Birth has being as condition, [262] venerable sir. Thus we
take it in this case: 'With being as condition, birth.'"

‘"With clinging as condition, being': so it was said. Now,
bhikkhus, does being have clinging as condition or not, or how
do you take it in this case?"

"Being has clinging as condition, venerable sir. Thus we take
it in this case: 'With clinging as condition, being.'"

"'With craving as condition, clinging': so it was said. Now,
bhikkhus, does clinging have craving as condition or not, or
how do you take it in this case?"

"Clinging has craving as condition, venerable sir. Thus we
take it in this case: 'With craving as condition, clinging.'"

"'With feeling as condition, craving': so it was said. Now,
bhikkhus, does craving have feeling as condition or not, or how
do you take it in this case?"

"Craving has feeling as condition, venerable sir. Thus we take
it in this case: 'With feeling as condition, craving.'"

"'With contact as condition, feeling': so it was said. Now,
bhikkhus, does feeling have contact as condition or not, or how
do you take it in this case?"

"Feeling has contact as condition, venerable sir. Thus we take
it in this case: 'With contact as condition, feeling.'"

"'With the sixfold base as condition, contact': so it was said.
Now, bhikkhus, does contact have the sixfold base as condition
or not, or how do you take it in this case?"


The Greater Discourse on the Destruction of Craving 355


"Contact has the sixfold base as condition, venerable sir.
fhus we take it in this case: 'With the sixfold base as condition,

contact.

"'With mentality-materiality as condition, the sixfold base':
s o it was said. Now, bhikkhus, does the sixfold base have men-
tality-materiality as condition or not, or how do you take it in
this case?"

"The sixfold base has mentality-materiality as condition, vener-
able sir. Thus we take it in this case: 'With mentality-materiality
as condition, the sixfold base.’"

'"With consciousness as condition, mentality-materiality': so
it was said. Now, bhikkhus, does mentality-materiality have
consciousness as condition or not, or how do you take it in
this case?"

"Mentality-materiality has consciousness as condition,
venerable sir. Thus we take it in this case: 'With consciousness
as condition, mentality-materiality.'"

"'With formations as condition, consciousness': so it was said.
Now, bhikkhus, does consciousness have formations as condi-
tion or not, or how do you take it in this case?"

"Consciousness has formations as condition, venerable sir.
Thus we take it in this case: 'With formations as condition,
consciousness.'"

"'With ignorance as condition, formations': so it was said.
Now, bhikkhus, do formations have ignorance as condition or
not, or how do you take it in this case?"

"Formations have ignorance as condition, venerable sir.
Thus we take it in this case: 'With formations as condition,
ignorance.'"

(recapitulation on arising)

19. "Good, bhikkhus. So you say thus, and I also say thus:
'When this exists, that comes to be; [263] with the arising of this,
that arises.' 408 That is, with ignorance as condition, formations
[come to be]; with formations as condition, consciousness; with
consciousness as condition, mentality-materiality; with mentality-
materiality as condition, the sixfold base; with the sixfold base
as condition, contact; with contact as condition, feeling; with
feeling as condition, craving; with craving as condition, clinging;


356 Mahatanhasankhaya Sutta: Sutta 38


i 264


with clinging as condition, being; with being as condition, birth;
with birth as condition, ageing and death, sorrow, lamentation,
pain, grief, and despair come to be. Such is the origin of this
whole mass of suffering.

(forward exposition on cessation)

20. "But with the remainderless fading away and cessation of
ignorance comes cessation of formations; with the cessation of
formations, cessation of consciousness; with the cessation of con-
sciousness, cessation of mentality-materiality; with the cessation of
mentality-materiality, cessation of the sixfold base; with the cessa-
tion of the sixfold base, cessation of contact; with the cessation of
contact, cessation of feeling; with the cessation of feeling, cessation
of craving; with the cessation of craving, cessation of clinging;
with the cessation of clinging, cessation of being; with the cessa-
tion of being, cessation of birth; with the cessation of birth, age-
ing and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair
cease. Such is the cessation of this whole mass of suffering.

(reverse order questionnaire on cessation)

21. '"With the cessation of birth, cessation of ageing and death':
so it was said. Now, bhikkhus, do ageing and death cease with
the cessation of birth or not, or how do you take it in this case?"

"Ageing and death cease with the cessation of birth, venerable
sir. Thus we take it in this case: 'With the cessation of birth, ces-
sation of ageing and death.'"

"'With the cessation of being, cessation of birth'... 'With the
cessation of clinging, cessation of being'.. .'With the cessation of
craving, cessation of clinging'... 'With the cessation of feeling,
cessation of craving'. . . 'With the cessation of contact, cessation of
feeling' [264]... 'With the cessation of the sixfold base, cessation
of contact'... 'With the cessation of mentality-materiality, cessa-
tion of the sixfold base'... 'With the cessation of consciousness,
cessation of mentality-materiality'... 'With the cessation of for-
mations, cessation of consciousness'... 'With the cessation of
ignorance, cessation of formations': so it was said. Now,
bhikkhus, do formations cease with the cessation of ignorance or
not, or how do you take it in this case?"


i 265 The Greater Discourse on the Destruction of Craving 357


"Formations cease with the cessation of ignorance, venerable
sir. Thus we take it in this case: 'With the cessation of ignorance,
cessation of formations.'"

(recapitulation on cessation)

22. "Good, bhikkhus. So you say thus, and I also say thus:
'When this does not exist, that does not come to be; with the
cessation of this, that ceases/ That is, with the cessation of
ignorance comes cessation of formations; with the cessation of
formations, cessation of consciousness; with the cessation of
consciousness, cessation of mentality-materiality; with the ces-
sation of mentality-materiality, cessation of the sixfold base;
with the cessation of the sixfold base, cessation of contact; with
the cessation of contact, cessation of feeling; with the cessation
of feeling, cessation of craving; with the cessation of craving,
cessation of clinging; with the cessation of clinging, cessation of
being; with the cessation of being, cessation of birth; with the
cessation of birth, ageing and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain,
grief, and despair cease. Such is the cessation of this whole mass
of suffering.

(personal knowledge)

23. "Bhikkhus, knowing and seeing in this way, [265] would you
run back to the past thus: 'Were we in the past? Were we not in
the past? What were we in the past? How were we in the past?
Having been what, what did we become in the past?'?" - "No,
venerable sir." - "Knowing and seeing in this way, would you
run forward to the future thus: 'Shall we be in the future? Shall
we not be in the future? What shall we be in the future? How
shall we be in the future? Having been what, what shall we
become in the future?'?" - "No, venerable sir." - "Knowing and
seeing in this way, would you now be inwardly perplexed about
the present thus: 'Am I? Am I not? What am I? How am I?
Where has this being come from? Where will it go?'?" 409 - "No,
venerable sir."

24. "Bhikkhus, knowing and seeing in this way, would you
speak thus: 'The Teacher is respected by us. We speak as we do
out of respect for the Teacher'?" - "No, venerable sir." -


358 Mahatanhasankhaya Sutta: Sutta 38


1266

"Knowing and seeing in this way, would you speak thus: 'The
Recluse says this, and so do [other] recluses, but we do not
speak thus'?" - "No, venerable sir." - "Knowing and seeing in
this way, would you acknowledge another teacher?" - "No,
venerable sir." - "Knowing and seeing in this way, would you
return to the observances, tumultuous debates, and auspicious
signs of ordinary recluses and brahmins, taking them as the core
[of the holy life]?" - "No, venerable sir." - "Do you speak only
of what you have known, seen, and understood for yourselves?"
- "Yes, venerable sir."

25. "Good, bhikkhus. So you have been guided by me with
this Dhamma, which is visible here and now, immediately effec-
tive, inviting inspection, onward leading, to be experienced by
the wise for themselves. For it was with reference to this that it
has been said: 'Bhikkhus, this Dhamma is visible here and now,
immediately effective, inviting inspection, onward leading, to be
experienced by the wise for themselves.'

(the round of existence: conception to maturity)

26. "Bhikkhus, the conception of an embryo in a womb takes
place through the union of three things. 410 Here, there is the
union of the mother and father, but it is not the mother's season,
and the being to be reborn 411 is not present - in this case there is
no [266] conception of an embryo in a womb. Here, there is the
union of the mother and father, and it is the mother's season,
but the being to be reborn is not present - in this case too there
is no conception of an embryo in a womb. But when there is the
union of the mother and father, and it is the mother's season,
and the being to be reborn is present, through the union of these
three things the conception of an embryo in a womb takes place.

27. "The mother then carries the embryo in her womb for nine
or ten months with much anxiety, as a heavy burden. Then, at
the end of nine or ten months, the mother gives birth with much
anxiety, as a heavy burden. Then, when the child is bom, she
nourishes it with her own blood; for the mother's breast-milk is
called blood in the Noble One's Discipline.

28. "When he grows up and his faculties mature, the child
plays at such games as toy ploughs, tipcat, somersaults, toy
windmills, toy measures, toy cars, and a toy bow and arrow.


The Greater Discourse on the Destruction of Craving 359


29 . "When he grows up and his faculties mature [still further ],
youth enjoys himself provided and endowed with the five
cords of sensual pleasure, with forms cognizable by the eye...
sounds cognizable by the ear... odours cognizable by the nose...
flavours cognizable by the tongue... tangibles cognizable by the
body that are wished for, desired, agreeable and likeable, con-
nected with sensual desire, and provocative of lust.


(THE CONTINUATION OF THE ROUND)

30. "On seeing a form with the eye, he lusts after it if it is pleasing;
he dislikes it if it is unpleasing. He abides with mindfulness of the
body unestablished, with a limited mind, and he does not under-
stand as it actually is the deliverance of mind and deliverance by
wisdom wherein those evil unwholesome states cease without
remainder. Engaged as he is in favouring and opposing, whatever
feeling he feels - whether pleasant or painful or neither-painful-
nor-pleasant - he delights in that feeling, welcomes it, and remains
holding to it. 412 As he does so, delight arises in him. Now delight
in feelings is clinging. With his clinging as condition, being [comes
to be]; with being as condition, birth; with birth as condition,
ageing and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair
come to be. Such is the origin of this whole mass of suffering.

"On hearing a sound with the ear... On smelling an odour
with the nose. ..On tasting a flavour with the tongue. ..On touch-
ing a tangible with the body... On cognizing a mind-object with
the mind, [267J he lusts after it if it is pleasing; he dislikes it if it
is unpleasing... Now delight in feelings is clinging. With his
clinging as condition, being [comes to be]; with being as condi-
tion, birth; with birth as condition, ageing and death, sorrow,
lamentation, pain, grief, and despair come to be. Such is the ori-
gin of this whole mass of suffering.

(THE ENDING OF THE ROUND: THE GRADUAL TRAINING)

31-38. "Here, bhikkhus, a Tathagata appears in the world,
accomplished, fully enlightened... (as Sutta 27, §§11-18)
[268-69] . . .he purifies his mind from doubt. [270]

39. "Having thus abandoned these five hindrances, imperfec-
tions of the mind that weaken wisdom, quite secluded from


360 MahatanhUsankhaya Sutta: Sutta 38


i 270


sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, he
enters upon and abides in the first jhana... With the stilling of
applied and sustained thought, he enters upon and abides in
the second jhana. . .With the fading away as well of rapture. . .he
enters upon and abides in the third jhana... With the abandon-
ing of pleasure and pain... he enters upon and abides in the
fourth jhana... which has neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity
of mindfulness due to equanimity.

(the ending of the round: full cessation)

40. "On seeing a form with the eye, he does not lust after it if it is
pleasing; he does not dislike it if it is unpleasing. He abides with
mindfulness of the body established, with an immeasurable
mind, and he understands as it actually is the deliverance of
mind and deliverance by wisdom wherein those evil unwhole-
some states cease without remainder. 413 Having thus abandoned
favouring and opposing, whatever feeling he feels, whether
pleasant or painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant, he does not
delight in that feeling, welcome it, or remain holding to it. 414 As
he does not do so, delight in feelings ceases in him. With the ces-
sation of his delight comes cessation of clinging; with the cessa-
tion of clinging, cessation of being; with the cessation of being,
cessation of birth; with the cessation of birth, ageing and death,
sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair cease. Such is the
cessation of this whole mass of suffering.

"On hearing a sound »with the ear... On smelling an odour
with the nose. . .On tasting a flavour with the tongue. . .On touch-
ing a tangible with the body... On cognizing a mind-object with
the mind, he does not lust after it if it is pleasing; he does not
dislike it if it is unpleasing... With the cessation of his delight
comes cessation of clinging; with the cessation of clinging, cessa-
tion of being; with the cessation of being, cessation of birth; with
the cessation of birth, ageing and death, sorrow, lamentation,
pain, grief, and despair cease. Such is the cessation of this whole
mass of suffering.


The Greater Discourse on the Destruction of Craving 361 j,

■f

INCLUSION)

£l' "Bhikkhus, remember this deliverance through the destruc-
tion of craving as taught in brief by me. But the bhikkhu Sati,

[271] son of a fisherman, is caught up in a vast net of craving, in
the trammel of craving."

that is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


39 MaM-Assapura Sutta
The Greater Discourse at Assapura


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing in the Angan country at a town of the Angans named
Assapura. There the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus:
"Bhikkhus." - “Venerable sir," they replied. The Blessed One
said this:

2. "'Recluses, recluses/ bhikkhus, that is how people perceive
you. And when you are asked, 'What are you?', you claim that
you are recluses. Since that is what you are designated and what
you claim to be, you should train thus: 'We will undertake and
practise those things that make one a recluse, that make one a
brahmin, 41s so that our designations may be true and our claims
genuine, and so that the services of those whose robes, alms-
food, resting place, and medicinal requisites we use shall bring
them great fruit and benefit, and so that our going forth shall
not be in vain but fruitful and fertile.'

(CONDUCT AND LIVELIHOOD)

3. "And what, bhikkhus, are the things that make one a recluse,
that make one a brahmin? Bhikkhus, you should train thus: 'We
will be possessed of shame and fear of wrongdoing.' 416 Now,
bhikkhus, you may think thus: 'We are possessed of shame and
fear of wrongdoing. That much is enough, that much has been
done, the goal of recluseship has been reached, there is nothing
more for us to do'; and you may rest content with that much.
Bhikkhus, I inform you, I declare to you: You who seek the
recluse's status, do not fall short of the goal of recluseship while
there is more to be done. 417

4. "What more is to be done? [272] Bhikkhus, you should train
thus: 'Our bodily conduct shall be purified, clear and open.


362


The Greater Discourse at Assapura 363


lawless and restrained, and we will not laud ourselves and dis-
parage others on account of that purified bodily conduct.' Now,
bhikkhus, you may think thus: 'We are possessed of shame and
fear of wrongdoing and our bodily conduct has been purified.
That much is enough, that much has been done, the goal of
recluseship has been reached, there is nothing more for us to
do'; and you may rest content with that much. Bhikkhus, I
inform you, I declare to you: You who seek the recluse's status,
do not fall short of the goal of recluseship while there is more to


be done.

5. "What more is to be done? Bhikkhus, you should train
thus: 'Our verbal conduct shall be purified, clear and open,
flawless and restrained, and we will not laud ourselves and
disparage others on account of that purified verbal conduct.'
Now, bhikkhus, you may think thus: 'We are possessed of
shame and fear of wrongdoing, our bodily conduct has been
purified, and our verbal conduct has been purified. That much
is enough...'; and you may rest content with that much.
Bhikkhus, I inform you, I declare to you: You who seek the
recluse's status, do not fall short of the goal of recluseship while
there is more to be done.

6. "What more is to be done? Bhikkhus, you should train thus:
'Our mental conduct shall be purified, clear and open, flawless
and restrained, and we will not laud ourselves and disparage
others on account of that purified mental conduct.' Now,
bhikkhus, you may think thus: 'We are possessed of shame and
fear of wrongdoing, our bodily conduct and verbal conduct
have been purified, and our mental conduct has been purified.
That much is enough...'; and you may rest content with that
much. Bhikkhus, I inform you, I declare to you: You who seek
the recluse's status, do not fall short of the goal of recluseship
while there is more to be done.

7. "What more is to be done? Bhikkhus, you should train thus:
'Our livelihood shall be purified, clear and open, flawless and
restrained, and we will not laud ourselves and disparage others
on account of that purified livelihood.' Now, bhikkhus, you may
think thus: 'We are possessed of shame and fear of wrongdoing,
our bodily conduct, verbal conduct, and mental conduct have
been purified, and our livelihood has been purified. [273] That
much is enough...'; and you may rest content with that much.


364 MaM-Assapura Sutta: Sutta 39


i273


Bhikkhus, I inform you, I declare to you: You who seek the
recluse's status, do not fall short of the goal of recluseship while
there is more to be done.

(restraint of the senses)

8. "What more is to be done? Bhikkhus, you should train thus:
'We will guard the doors of our sense faculties. On seeing a
form with the eye, we will not grasp at its signs and features.
Since, if we left the eye faculty unguarded, evil unwholesome
states of covetousness and grief might invade us, we will prac-
tise the way of its restraint, we will guard the eye faculty, we
will undertake the restraint of the eye faculty. On hearing a
sound with the ear... On smelling an odour with the nose... On
tasting a flavour with the tongue... On touching a tangible with
the body... On cognizing a mind-object with the mind, we will
not grasp at its signs and features. Since, if we left the mind fac-
ulty unguarded, evil unwholesome states of covetousness and
grief might invade us, we will practise the way of its restraint,
we will guard the mind faculty, we will undertake the restraint
of the mind faculty.' Now, bhikkhus, you may think thus: 'We
are possessed of shame and fear of wrongdoing, our bodily con-
duct, verbal conduct, mental conduct, and livelihood have been
purified, and we guard the doors of our sense faculties. That
much is enough...'; and you may rest content with that much.
Bhikkhus, I inform you, I declare to you: You who seek the
recluse's status, do not fall short of the goal of recluseship while
there is more to be done.

(moderation in eating)

9. "What more is to be done? Bhikkhus, you should train thus:
'We will be moderate in eating. Reflecting wisely, we will take
food neither for amusement nor for intoxication nor for the sake
of physical beauty and attractiveness, but only for the
endurance and continuance of this body, for ending discomfort,
and for assisting the holy life, considering: "Thus I shall termi-
nate old feelings without arousing new feelings and I shall be
healthy and blameless and shall live in comfort."' Now,
bhikkhus, you may think thus: 'We are possessed of shame and


The Greater Discourse at Assapura 365


fear of wrongdoing, our bodily conduct, verbal conduct, mental
conduct, and livelihood have been purified, we guard the doors
f oU r sense faculties, and we are moderate in eating. That much
enough../; and you may rest content with that much,
ghikkhus, I inform you, I declare to you: You who seek the
recluse's status, do not fall short of the goal of reduseship while
there is more to be done.


(wakefulness)

10. "What more is to be done? Bhikkhus, you should train thus:
'We will be devoted to wakefulness. During the day, while
walking back and forth and sitting, we will purify our minds of
obstructive states. In the first watch of the night, [274] while
walking back arid forth and sitting, we will purify our minds of
obstructive states. In the middle watch of the night we will lie
down on the right side in the lion's pose with one foot overlap-
ping the other, mindful and fully aware, after noting in our
minds the time for rising. After rising, in the third watch of the
night, while walking back and forth and sitting, we will purify
our minds of obstructive states.' Now, bhikkhus, you may think
thus: 'We are possessed of shame and fear of wrongdoing, our
bodily conduct, verbal conduct, mental conduct, and livelihood
have been purified, we guard the doors of our sense faculties,
we are moderate in eating, and we are devoted to wakefulness.
That much is enough...'; and you may rest content with that
much. Bhikkhus, I inform you, I declare to you: You who seek
the recluse's status, do not fall short of the goal of reduseship
while there is more to be done.


(mindfulness and full awareness)

11. "What more is to be done? Bhikkhus, you should train thus:
'We will be possessed of mindfulness and full awareness. We
will act in full awareness when going forward and returning; we
will act in full awareness when looking ahead and looking
away; we will act in full awareness when flexing and extending
our limbs; we will act in full awareness when wearing our robes
and carrying our outer robe and bowl; we will act in full aware-
ness when eating, drinking, consuming food, and tasting; we


366 Maha-Assapura Sutta: Sutta 39


i 275


,

will act in full awareness when defecating and urinating; we
will act in full awareness when walking, standing, sitting, falling
asleep, waking up, talking, and keeping silent.' Now, bhikkhus,
you may think thus: 'We are possessed of shame and fear of
wrongdoing, our bodily conduct, verbal conduct, mental con-
duct, and livelihood have been purified, we guard the doors of
our sense faculties, we are moderate in eating, we are devoted to
wakefulness, and we are possessed of mindfulness and full
awareness. That much is enough, that much has been done, the
goal of recluseship has been reached, there is nothing more for
us to do'; and you may rest content with that much. Bhikkhus, I
inform you, I declare to you: You who seek the recluse's status,
do not fall short of the goal of recluseship while there is more to
be done.

(abandoning of the hindrances)

12. "What more is to be done? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu resorts
to a secluded resting place: the forest, the root of a tree, a moun-
tain, a ravine, a hillside cave, a charnel ground, a jungle thicket,
an open space, a heap of straw.

13. "On returning from his almsround, after his meal he sits
down, folding his legs crosswise, setting his body erect and
establishing mindfulness before him. Abandoning covetousness
for the world, he abides with a mind free from covetousness; he
purifies his mind from covetousness. Abandoning ill will and
hatred, he abides with a mind free from ill will, compassionate
for the welfare of all living beings; [275] he purifies his mind
from ill will and hatred. Abandoning sloth and torpor, he abides
free from sloth and torpor, percipient of light, mindful and fully
aware; he purifies his mind from sloth and torpor. Abandoning
restlessness and remorse, he abides unagitated with a mind
inwardly peaceful; he purifies his mind from restlessness and
remorse. Abandoning doubt, he abides having gone beyond
doubt, unperplexed about wholesome states; he purifies his
mind from doubt.

14. "Bhikkhus, suppose a man were to take a loan and under-
take business and his business were to succeed so that he could
repay all the money of the old loan and there would remain
enough extra to maintain a wife; then on considering this, he


The Greater Discourse at Assapura 367


would be glad and full of joy. Or suppose a man were afflicted,
guffering and gravely ill, and his food would not agree with him
and his body had no strength, but later he would recover from
the affliction and his food would agree with him and his body
would regain strength; then on considering this, he would be
glad and full of joy. Or suppose a man were imprisoned in a
prisonhouse, but later he would be released from prison, safe
and secure, with no loss to his property; then on considering
this, he would be glad and full of joy. Or suppose a man were a
slave, not self-dependent but dependent on others, unable to go
where he wants, but later on he would be released from slavery,
self-dependent, independent of others, a freed man able to go
where he wants; then on considering this, [276] he would be
glad and full of joy. Or suppose a man with wealth and property
were to enter a road across a desert, but later on he would cross
over the desert, safe and secure, with no loss to his property;
then on considering this, he would be glad and full of joy. So
too, bhikkhus, when these five hindrances are unabandoned in
himself, a bhikkhu sees them respectively as a debt, a disease, a
prisonhouse, slavery, and a road across a desert. But when these
five hindrances have been abandoned in himself, he sees that as
freedom from debt, healthiness, release from prison, freedom
from slavery, and a land of safety. 418


(the four jhAnas)


15. "Having abandoned these five hindrances, imperfections of
the mind that weaken wisdom, quite secluded from sensual
pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, he enters upon
and abides in the first jhana, which is accompanied by applied
and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of seclu-
sion. He makes the rapture and pleasure born of seclusion
drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part
of his whole body unpervaded by the rapture and pleasure bom
of seclusion. Just as a skilled bath man or a bath man's appren-
tice heaps bath powder in a metal basin and, sprinkling it grad-
ually with water, kneads it until the moisture wets his ball of
bath powder, soaks it, and pervades it inside and out, yet the
ball itself does not ooze; so too, a bhikkhu makes the rapture
and pleasure born of seclusion drench, steep, fill, and pervade


368 Mahcl-Assapura Sutta: Sutta 39


i 277


this body, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded
by the rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.

16. "Again, bhikkhus, with the stilling of applied and sustained
thought, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second jhana,
which has self-confidence and singleness of mind without
applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born
of concentration. He makes the rapture and pleasure bom of con-
centration drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there
is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the rapture and
pleasure born of concentration. Just as though there were a lake
whose waters welled up from below [277] and it had no inflow
from east, west, north, or south, and would not be replenished
from time to time by showers of rain, then the cool fount of water
welling up in the lake would make the cool water drench, steep,
fill, and pervade the lake, so that there would be no part of the
whole lake unpervaded by cool water; so too, a bhikkhu makes
the rapture and pleasure born of concentration drench, steep, fill,
and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body
unpervaded by the rapture and pleasure bom of concentration.

17. "Again, bhikkhus, with the fading away as well of rapture,
a bhikkhu abides in equanimity, and mindful and fully aware,
still feeling pleasure with the body, he enters upon and abides in
the third jhana, on account of which noble ones announce: 'He
has a pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.' He
makes the pleasure divested of rapture drench, steep, fill, and
pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body
unpervaded by the pleasure divested of rapture. Just as, in a
pond of blue or red or white lotuses, some lotuses that are born
and grow in the water thrive immersed in the water without ris-
ing out of it, and cool water drenches, steeps, fills, and pervades
them to their tips and their roots, so that there is no part of all
those lotuses unpervaded by cool water; so too, a bhikkhu
makes the pleasure divested of rapture drench, steep, fill, and
pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body
unpervaded by the pleasure divested of rapture.

18. "Again, bhikkhus, with the abandoning of pleasure and
pain, and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, a
bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the fourth jhana, which has
neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to
equanimity. He sits pervading this body with a pure bright


The Greater Discourse at Assapura 369

j^jnd, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by
pure bright mind. Just as though a man were sitting covered
from the head down with a white cloth, so that there would be
n o part of his whole [278] body unpervaded by the white cloth;
so too, a bhikkhu sits pervading this body with a pure bright
mind, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by
the pure bright mind.


(THE THREE TRUE KNOWLEDGES)

19. "When his concentrated mind is thus purified, bright,
unblemished, rid of imperfection, malleable, wieldy, steady, and
attained to imperturbability, he directs it to knowledge of the
recollection of past lives. He recollects his manifold past lives,
that is, one birth, two births... (as Sutta 4, §27 )...' Thus with their
aspects and particulars he recollects his manifold past lives. Just
as a man might go from his own village to another village and
then back again to his own village, he might think: 'I went from
my own village to that village, and there I stood in such a way,
sat in such a way, spoke in such a way, kept silent in such a
way; and from that village I went to that other village, and there
I stood in such a way, sat in such a way, spoke in such a way,
kept silent in such a way; and from that village I came back
again to my own village.' So too, a bhikkhu recollects his mani-
fold past lives. . .Thus with their aspects and particulars he recol-
lects his manifold past lives.

20. "When his concentrated mind is thus purified, bright,
unblemished, rid of imperfection, malleable, wieldy, steady, and
attained to imperturbability, he directs it to knowledge of the
passing away and reappearance of beings. ..(as Sutta 4, §29)
[279]... Thus with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses
the human, he sees beings passing away and reappearing, inferi-
or and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and he
understands how beings pass on according to their actions. Just
as though there were two houses with doors and a man with
good sight standing there between them saw people entering the
houses and coming out and passing to and fro, so too, with the
divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, a
bhikkhu sees beings passing away and reappearing... and he
understands how beings pass on according to their actions.


370 Maha-Assapura Sutta: Sutta 39


i28Q 1


21. "When his concentrated mind is thus purified, bright 1
unblemished, rid of imperfection, malleable, wieldy, steady, and i
attained to imperturbability, he directs it to knowledge of the
destruction of the taints. He understands as it actually is: 'This is
suffering';... 'This is the origin of suffering';... 'This is the cessa-
tion of suffering';... 'This is the way leading to the cessation of
suffering';... 'These are the taints';... 'This is the origin of the
taints';... 'This is the cessation of the taints';... 'This is the way
leading to the cessation of the taints.'

"When he knows and sees thus, his mind is liberated from the
taint of sensual desire, from the taint of being, and from the taint
of ignorance. When it is liberated there comes the knowledge: 'It
is liberated.' He understands: 'Birth is destroyed, the holy life
has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no
more coming to any state of being.'

"Just as if there were a lake in a mountain recess, clear, limpid,
and undisturbed, so that a man with good sight standing on the
bank could see shells, gravel, and pebbles, and also shoals of
fish swimming about and resting, he might think: "There is this
lake, clear, limpid, and undisturbed, and there are these [280]
shells, gravel, and pebbles, and also these shoals of fish swim-
ming about and resting.' So too, a bhikkhu understands as it
actually is: 'This is suffering. '...He understands: 'Birth is
destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has
been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.'

(the akahant) ,

22. "Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu such as this is called a recluse, a brah-
min, one who has been washed, one who has attained to knowl-
edge, a holy scholar, a noble one, an arahant. 419

23. "And how is a bhikkhu a recluse? He has quieted down
evil unwholesome states that defile, bring renewal of being, give
trouble, ripen in suffering, and lead to future birth, ageing, and
death. That is how a bhikkhu is a recluse.

24. "And how is a bhikkhu a brahmin? He has expelled evil
unwholesome states that defile... and lead to future birth, age-
ing, and death. That is how a bhikkhu is a brahmin.

25. "And how is a bhikkhu one who has been washed? 420 He
has washed off evil unwholesome states that defile... and lead to


The Greater Discourse at Assapura 371



future birth, ageing, and death. That is how a bhikkhu is one
w ho has been washed.

26. "And how is a bhikkhu one who has attained to knowl-
edge? He has known evil unwholesome states that defile... and
lead to future birth, ageing, and death. That is how a bhikkhu is
one who has attained to knowledge.

27. "And how is a bhikkhu a holy scholar? 421 The evil
unwholesome states that defile... and lead to future birth, age-
ing, and death, have streamed away from him. That is how a
bhikkhu is a holy scholar.

28. "And how is a bhikkhu a noble one? Evil unwholesome
states that defile... and lead to future birth, ageing, and death,
are far away from him. That is how a bhikkhu is a noble one.

29. "And how is a bhikkhu an arahant? Evil unwholesome
states that defile, bring renewal of being, give trouble, ripen in
suffering, and lead to future birth, ageing, and death, are far
away from him. That is how a bhikkhu is an arahant."

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.



40 Cula- Assapura Sutta
The Shorter Discourse at Assapura


[281] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One
was living in the Angan country at a town of the Angans named
Assapura. There the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus:
"Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir/' they replied. The Blessed One
said this:

2. '"Recluses, recluses,' bhikkhus, that is how people perceive
you. And when you are asked, 'What are you?' you claim that
you are recluses. Since that is what you are designated and what
you claim to be, you should train thus: 'We will practise the way
proper to the recluse 422 so that our designations may be true and
our claims genuine, and so that the services of those whose
robes, almsfood, resting place, and medicinal requisites we use
shall bring them great fruit and benefit, and so that our going
forth shall not be in vain but fruitful and fertile.'

3. "How, bhikkhus, does a bhikkhu not practise the way proper
to the recluse? For so long as a bhikkhu who is covetous has not
abandoned covetousness, who has a mind of ill will has not
abandoned ill will, who is angry has not abandoned anger, who
is revengeful has not abandoned revenge, who is contemptuous
has not abandoned contempt, who is domineering has not aban-
doned his domineering attitude, who is envious has not aban-
doned envy, who is avaricious has not abandoned avarice, who
is fraudulent has not abandoned fraud, who is deceitful has not
abandoned deceit, who has evil wishes has not abandoned evil
wishes, who has wrong view has not abandoned wrong view, 423
for so long he does not practise the way proper to the recluse, I
say, because of his failure to abandon these stains for the
recluse, these faults for the recluse, these dregs for the recluse,
which are grounds for rebirth in a state of deprivation and
whose results are to be experienced in an unhappy destination.

372



1283


The Shorter Discourse at Assapura 373


4. "Suppose the weapon called a niataja, well whetted on both
edges, were enclosed and encased in a patchwork sheath. I say
that such a bhikkhu's going forth is comparable to that.

5. "I do not say that the recluse's status comes about in a
patchwork-cloak wearer through the mere wearing of the patch-
work cloak, nor in a naked ascetic through mere nakedness, nor
in a dweller in dust and dirt through mere dust and dirt, nor in
a washer in water through mere washing in water, nor in a tree-
root dweller through mere [282] dwelling at the root of a tree,
nor in an open-air dweller through mere dwelling in the open
air, nor in a practitioner of continuous standing through mere
continuous standing, nor in a taker of food at stated intervals
through mere taking of food at stated intervals, nor in a reciter
of incantations through mere recitation of incantations; nor do I
say that the recluse's status comes about in a matted-hair ascetic
through mere wearing of the hair matted.

6. "Bhikkhus, if through the mere wearing of the patchwork
cloak a patchwork-cloak wearer who was covetous abandoned
covetousness, who had a mind of ill will abandoned ill will...
who had wrong view abandoned wrong view, then his friends
and companions, his kinsmen and relatives, would make him a
patchwork-cloak wearer as soon as he was born and have him
undertake the patchwork-cloak wearing thus: 'Come, my dear,
be a patchwork-cloak wearer so that, as a patchwork-cloak
wearer, when you are covetous you will abandon covetousness,
when you have a mind of ill will you will abandon ill will...
when you have wrong view you will abandon wrong view/ But
I see here a patchwork-cloak wearer who is covetous, who has a
mind of ill will. . .who has wrong view; and that is why I do not
say that the recluse's status comes about in a patchwork-cloak
wearer through the mere wearing of the patchwork cloak.

"If through mere nakedness a naked ascetic who was covetous
abandoned covetousness... If through mere dust and dirt. ..If
through mere washing in water. . .If through mere dwelling at the
root of a tree. ..If through mere dwelling in the open air.. .If
through mere continuous standing... If through mere taking of
food at stated intervals... If through mere recitation of incanta-
tions... If through mere wearing of the hair matted... [283]... and
that is why I do not say that the recluse's status comes about in a
matted-hair ascetic through the mere wearing of the hair matted.


374 Cula-Assapura Sutta: Sutta 40


i 284


7. "How, bhikkhus, does a bhikkhu practise the way proper to
the recluse? When any bhikkhu who was covetous has aban-
doned covetousness, who had a mind of ill will has abandoned ill
will, who was angry has abandoned anger, who was revengeful
has abandoned revenge, who was contemptuous has abandoned
contempt, who was domineering has abandoned his domineer-
ing attitude, who was envious has abandoned envy, who was
avaricious has abandoned avarice, who was fraudulent has
abandoned fraud, who was deceitful has abandoned deceit, who
had evil wishes has abandoned evil wishes, who had wrong
view has abandoned wrong view, then he practises the way
proper to the recluse, I say, because of his abandoning these
stains for the recluse, these faults for the recluse, these dregs for
the recluse, which are grounds for rebirth in a state of depriva-
tion and whose results are to be experienced in an unhappy
destination.

8. "He sees himself purified of all these evil unwholesome
states, he sees himself liberated from them. When he sees this,
gladness is born in him. When he is glad, rapture is born in him;
in one who is rapturous, the body becomes tranquil; one whose
body is tranquil feels pleasure; in one who feels pleasure, the
mind becomes concentrated.

9. "He abides pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with
loving-kindness, likewise the second, likewise the third, likewise
the fourth; so above, below, around, and everywhere, and to all
as to himself, he abides pervading the all-encompassing world
with a mind imbued wifla loving-kindness, abundant, exalted,
immeasurable, without hostility and without ill will.

10-12. "He abides pervading one quarter with a mind imbued
with compassion... with a mind imbued with appreciative
joy... with a mind imbued with equanimity... abundant, exalted,
immeasurable, without hostility and without ill will.

13. "Suppose there were a pond with clear, agreeable cool
water, transparent, with smooth banks, delightful. [284] If a
man, scorched and exhausted by hot weather, weary, parched,
and thirsty, came from the east or from the west or from the
north or from the south or from where you will, having come
upon the pond he would quench his thirst and his hot-weather
fever. So too, bhikkhus, if anyone from a clan of nobles goes forth
from the home life into homelessness, and after encountering the


i 284


The Shorter Discourse at Assapura 375


Dhamma and Discipline proclaimed by the Tathagata, develops
loving-kindness, compassion, appreciative joy, and equanimity,
and thereby gains internal peace, then because of that internal
peace he practises the way proper to the recluse, I say. And if
anyone from a clan of brahmins goes forth... If anyone from a
clan of merchants goes forth... If anyone from a clan of workers
goes forth from the home life into homelessness, and after
encountering the Dhamma and Discipline proclaimed by the
Tathagata, develops loving-kindness, compassion, appreciative
joy, and equanimity, and thereby gains internal peace, then
because of that internal peace he practises the way proper to the
recluse, I say.

14. "Bhikkhus, if anyone from a clan of nobles goes forth from
the home life into homelessness, and by realising for himself
with direct knowledge here and now enters upon and abides in
the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are
taintless with the destruction of the taints, then he is already a
recluse because of the destruction of the taints. 424 And if anyone
from a clan of brahmins goes forth... If anyone from a clan of
merchants goes forth... If anyone from a clan of workers goes
forth from the home life into homelessness, and by realising for
himself with direct knowledge here and now enters upon and
abides in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom
that are taintless with the destruction of the taints, then he is
already a recluse because of the destruction of the taints."

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.



5

The Shorter Division of Pairs

(Culayamakavagga)




41 Saleyyaka Sutta
The Brahmins of Sala


[285] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One
was wandering by stages in the Kosalan Country with a large
Sangha of bhikkhus, and eventually he arrived at a Kosalan
brahmin village named Sala.

2. The brahmin householders of Sala heard: "The recluse
Gotama, the son of the Sakyans who went forth from a Sakyan
clan, has been wandering in the Kosalan country with a large
Sangha of bhikkhus and has come to Sala. Now a good report of
Master Gotama has been spread to this effect: That Blessed One
is accomplished, fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge
and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of
persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened,
blessed. He declares this world with its gods, its Maras, and its
Brahmas, this generation with its recluses and brahmins, its
princes and its people, which he has himself realised with direct
knowledge. He teaches the Dhamma good in the beginning,
good in the middle, and good in the end, with the right meaning
and phrasing, and he reveals a holy life that is utterly perfect
and pure.' Now it is good to see such arahants."

3. Then the brahmin householders of Sala went to the Blessed
One. Some paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down at one
side; some exchanged greetings with him, and when this courte-
ous and amiable talk was finished, sat down at one side; some
extended their hands in reverential salutation towards the
Blessed One and sat down at one side; some pronounced their
name and clan in the Blessed One's presence and sat down at
one side; some kept silent and sat down at one side.

4. When they were seated, they said to the Blessed One:
"Master Gotama, what is the cause and condition why some
beings here, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear


379


380 Saleyyaka Sutta: Sutta 41


i 286


in states of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition,
even in hell? And what is the cause and condition why some
beings here, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear
in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world?"

5. "Householders, it is by reason of conduct not in accordance
with the Dhamma, by reason of unrighteous conduct that some
beings here, on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear
in states of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition,
even in hell. It is by reason of conduct in accordance with the
Dhamma, by reason of righteous conduct that some beings here,
on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in a happy
destination, even in the heavenly world." [286]

6. "We do not understand the detailed meaning of Master
Gotama's utterance, which he has spoken in brief without
expounding the detailed meaning. It would be good if Master
Gotama would teach us the Dhamma so that we might under-
stand the detailed meaning of his utterance."

"Then, householders, listen and attend closely to what I
shall say."

"Yes, venerable sir," they replied. The Blessed One said this:

7. "Householders, there are three kinds of bodily conduct not in
accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct. There are
four kinds of verbal conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma,
unrighteous conduct. There are three kinds of mental conduct
not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct.

8. "And how, householders, are there three kinds of bodily
conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous con-
duct? Here someone kills living beings; he is murderous, bloody-
handed, given to blows and violence, merciless to living beings.
He takes what is not given; he takes by way of theft the wealth
and property of others in the village or forest. He misconducts
himself in sensual pleasures; he has intercourse with women
who are protected by their mother, father, mother and father,
brother, sister, or relatives, who have a husband, who are pro-
tected by law, and even with those who are garlanded in token
of betrothal. That is how there are three kinds of bodily conduct
not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct.

9. "And how, householders, are there four kinds of verbal con-
duct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct?
Here someone speaks falsehood; when summoned to a court, or


i 287


The Brahmins o/Sala 381


to a meeting, or to his relatives' presence, or to his guild, or to
the royal family's presence, and questioned as a witness thus:
'So, good man, tell what you know,' not knowing, he says, 'I
know,' or knowing, he says, 'I do not know'; not seeing, he says,
T see,' or seeing, he says, 'I do not see'; in full awareness he
speaks falsehood for his own ends, or for another's ends, or for
some trifling worldly end. He speaks maliciously; he repeats
elsewhere what he has heard here in order to divide [those peo-
ple] from these, or he repeats to these people what he has heard
elsewhere in order to divide [these people] from those; thus he
is one who divides those who are united, a creator of divisions,
who enjoys discord, rejoices in discord, delights in discord, a
speaker of words that create discord. He speaks harshly; he
utters such words as are rough, hard, hurtful to others, offensive
to others, bordering on anger, unconducive to concentration.
[287] He is a gossip; he speaks at the wrong time, speaks what is
not fact, speaks what is useless, speaks contrary to the Dhamma
and the Discipline; at the wrong time he speaks such words as
are worthless, unreasonable, immoderate, and unbeneficial.
That is how there are four kinds of verbal conduct not in accor-
dance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct.

10. "And how, householders, are there three kinds of mental
conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous con-
duct? Here someone is covetous; he covets the wealth and prop-
erty of others thus: 'Oh, may what belongs to another be mine!'
Or he has a mind of ill will and intentions of hate thus: 'May these
beings be slain and slaughtered, may they be cut off, perish, or be
annihilated!' Or he has wrong view, distorted vision, thus:
'There is nothing given, nothing offered, nothing sacrificed; no
fruit or result of good and bad actions; no this world, no other
world; no mother, no father; no beings who are reborn sponta-
neously; no good and virtuous recluses and brahmins in the
world who have themselves realised by direct knowledge and
declare this world and the other world.' 425 That is how there are
three kinds of mental conduct not in accordance with the
Dhamma, unrighteous conduct. So, householders, it is by reason
of such conduct not in accordance with the Dhamma, by reason
of such unrighteous conduct that some beings here on the disso-
lution of the body, after death, reappear in states of deprivation,
in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell.


382 Saleyyaka Sutta: Sutta 41


i 288


11. "Householders/ there are three kinds of bodily conduct in
accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct. There are four
kinds of verbal conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, right-
eous conduct. There are three kinds of mental conduct in accor-
dance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct.

12. "And how, householders, are there three kinds of bodily
conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct?
Here someone, abandoning the killing of living beings, abstains
from killing living beings; with rod and weapon laid aside, gen-
tle and kindly, he abides compassionate to all living beings.
Abandoning the taking of what is not given, he abstains from
taking what is not given; he does not take by way of theft the
wealth and property of others in the village or in the forest.
Abandoning misconduct in sensual pleasures, he abstains from
misconduct in sensual pleasures; he does not have intercourse
with women who are protected by their mother, father, mother
and father, brother, sister, or relatives, who have a husband, who
are protected by law, or with those who are garlanded in token
of betrothal. That is how there are three kinds of bodily conduct
in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct. [288]

13. "And how, householders, are there four kinds of verbal
conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct?
Here someone, abandoning false speech, abstains from false
speech; when summoned to a court, or to a meeting, or to his
relatives' presence, or to his guild, or to the royal family's pres-
ence, and questioned as a witness thus: 'So, good man, tell what
you know,' not knowing, he says, 'I do not know,' or knowing,
he says, 'I know'; not seeing, he says, 'I do not see,' or seeing, he
says, 'I see'; he does not in full awareness speak falsehood for
his own ends, or for another's ends, or for some trifling worldly
end. Abandoning malicious speech, he abstains from malicious
speech; he does not repeat elsewhere what he has heard here in
order to divide [those people] from these, nor does he repeat to
these people what he has heard elsewhere in order to divide
[these people] from those; thus he is one who reunites those
who are divided, a promoter of friendships, who enjoys con-
cord, rejoices in concord, delights in concord, a speaker of words
that promote concord. Abandoning harsh speech, he abstains
from harsh speech; he speaks such words as are gentle, pleasing
to the ear, and loveable, as go to the heart, are courteous,



The Brahmins of Sola 383


i2 89

desired by many, and agreeable to many. Abandoning gossip,
tie abstains from gossip; he speaks at the right time, speaks what
is fact, speaks on what is good, speaks on the Dhamma and the
discipline; at the right time he speaks such words as are worth
recording, reasonable, moderate, and beneficial. That is how
there are four kinds of verbal conduct in accordance with the
Dhamma, righteous conduct.

14. "And how, householders, are there three kinds of mental
conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct?
Here someone is not covetous; he does not covet the wealth and
property of others thus: 'Oh, may what belongs to another be
mine!' His mind is without ill will and he has intentions free
from hate thus: 'May these beings be free from enmity, afflic-
tion and anxiety! May they live happily!' He has right view,
undistorted vision, thus: 'There is what is given and what is
offered and what is sacrificed; there is fruit and result of good
and bad actions; there is this world and the other world; there
is mother and father; there are beings who are reborn sponta-
neously; there are good and virtuous recluses and brahmins in
the world who have themselves realised by direct knowledge
and declare this world and the other world.' That is how there
are three kinds of mental conduct in accordance with the
Dhamma, righteous conduct. So, householders, it is by reason
of such conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, by reason of
such righteous conduct that some beings here, on the dissolu-
tion of the body, after death, reappear in a happy destination,
even in the heavenly world, [289]

15. "If, householders, one who observes conduct in accordance
with the Dhamma, righteous conduct, should wish: 'Oh, that on
the dissolution of the body, after death, I might reappear in the
company of well-to-do nobles!' it is possible that, on the dissolu-
tion of the body, after death, he will reappear in the company of
well-to-do nobles. Why is that? Because he observes conduct
that is in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct.

16-17. "If, householders, one who observes conduct in accor-
dance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct, should wish: 'Oh,
that on the dissolution of the body, after death, 1 might reappear
in the company of well-to-do brahmins!... in the company of
well-to-do householders!' it is possible that, on the dissolution
of the body, after death, he will reappear in the company of


384 Saleyyaka Sutta: Sutta 41


i 290


well-to-do householders. Why is that? Because he observes con-
duct that is in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct

18-42. "If, householders, one who observes conduct in accor-
dance with the Dhamma, righteous conduct, should wish: 'Oh,
that on the dissolution of the body, after death, I might reappear
in the company of the gods of the heaven of the Four Great
Kings!... in the company of the gods of the heaven of the Thirty-
three . . . the Y ama gods . . . the gods of the T usita heaven . . . the gods
who delight in creating... the gods who wield power over oth-
ers' creations... the gods of Brahma's retinue. ..the gods of
Radiance 426 ... the gods of Limited Radiance. ..the gods of
Immeasurable Radiance... the gods of Streaming Radiance... the
gods of Glory. ..the gods of Limited Glory. ..the gods of
Immeasurable Glory... the gods of Refulgent Glory... the gods of
Great Fruit... the Aviha gods... the Atappa gods... the Sudassa
gods. ..the SudassI gods.. .the Akanittha gods. ..the gods of the
base of infinite space. . .the gods of the base of infinite conscious-
ness. . .the gods of the base of nothingness. . .the gods of the base
of neither-perception-nor-non-perception!' it is possible that on
the dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear in the
company of the gods of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
Why is that? Because he observes conduct in accordance with
the Dhamma, righteous conduct.

43. "If, householders, one who observes conduct in accordance
with the Dhamma, righteous conduct, should wish: 'Oh, that by
realising for myself with direct knowledge I might here and
now enter upon and abidfe in the deliverance of mind and deliv-
erance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the
taints!' it is possible that, by realising for himself with direct
knowledge, he will here and now enter upon and abide in the
deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taint-
less with the destruction of the taints. Why is that? Because he
observes conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous
conduct." 427 [290]

44. When this was said, the brahmin householders of Sala said
to the Blessed One: "Magnificent, Master Gotama! Magnificent,
Master Gotama! Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in
many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been
overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to
one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the darkness for




1




42 Veranjaka Sutta
The Brahmins of Veranja


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Savatthl in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.

2. Now on that occasion some brahmin householders of
Veranja were on a visit to Savatthl for some business or other.
[291]

3-44. [The text of this sutta is the same as that of Sutta 41, except
that where the preceding sutta is phrased in terms of "conduct not in
accordance with the Dhamma, unrighteous conduct" (§§7-10)
and "conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, righteous con-
duct" (§§11-14), this sutta is phrased in terms of "one who does
not observe conduct in accordance with the Dhamma, one of
unrighteous conduct" and "one who observes conduct in accor-
dance with the Dhamma, one of righteous conduct"; substitute
"Veranja" for "Sala" throughout.]






43 Mahavedalla Sutta
The Greater Series of
Questions and Answers


[292] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One
was living at Savatthl in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.

Then, when it was evening, the venerable Maha Kotthita rose
from meditation, went to the venerable Sariputta, and
exchanged greetings with him. 428 When this courteous and ami-
able talk was finished, he sat down at one side and said to the
venerable Sariputta:

(wisdom)

2. ""One who is unwise, one who is unwise' is said, friend. With
reference to what is this said, 'one who is unwise'?"

"'One does not wisely understand, one does not wisely
understand/ friend; that is why it is said, 'one who is unwise/
And what doesn't one wisely understand? One does not wisely
understand: 'This is suffering'; one does not wisely under-
stand: 'This is the origin of suffering'; one does not wisely
understand: 'This is the cessation of suffering'; one does not
wisely understand: 'This is the way leading to the cessation of
suffering.' 'One does not wisely understand, one does not
wisely understand/ friend; that is why it is said, 'one who is
unwise.'"

Saying, "Good, friend," the venerable Maha Kotthita delighted
and rejoiced in the venerable Sariputta's words. Then he asked
him a further question:

3. "'One who is wise, one who is wise,' is said, friend. With
reference to what is this said, 'one who is wise'?"

"'One wisely understands, one wisely understands/ friend;
that is why it is said, 'one who is wise.' What does one wisely
understand? One wisely understands: 'This is suffering'; one


387


388 Mahavedalla Sutta: Sutta 43


i293


wisely understands: 'This is the origin of suffering'; one wisely
understands: 'This is the cessation of suffering'; one wisely
understands: 'This is the way leading to the cessation of suffer-
ing.' 'One wisely understands, one wisely understands/ friend;
that is why it is said, 'one who is wise/" 429

(consciousness)

4. "'Consciousness, consciousness' is said, friend. With reference
to what is 'consciousness' said?"

"'It cognizes, it cognizes/ friend; that is why 'consciousness' is
said. 430 What does it cognize? It cognizes: '[This is] pleasant'; it
cognizes: '[This is] painful'; it cognizes: '[This is] neither-
painful-nor-pleasant.' 'It cognizes, it cognizes/ friend; that is
why 'consciousness' is said." 431

5. "Wisdom and consciousness, friend - are these states con-
joined or disjoined? And is it possible to separate each of these
states from the other in order to describe the difference between
them?"

"Wisdom and consciousness, friend - these states are con-
joined, not disjoined, and it is impossible to separate each of
these states from the other in order to describe the difference
between them. For what one wisely understands, that one cog-
nizes, and what one cognizes, that one wisely understands. [293]
That is why these states are conjoined, not disjoined, and it is
impossible to separate each of these states from the other in
order to describe the difference between them." 432

6. "What is the difference, friend, between wisdom and con-
sciousness, these states that are conjoined, not disjoined?"

"The difference, friend, between wisdom and consciousness,
these states that are conjoined, not disjoined, is this: wisdom is
to be developed, consciousness is to be fully understood." 433

(feeling)

7, "'Feeling, feeling' is said, friend. With reference to what is
'feeling' said?"

"'It feels, it feels,' friend; that is why 'feeling' is said. What does
it feel? It feels pleasure, it feels pain, it feels neither-pain-nor-
pleasure. 'It feels, it feels/ friend, that is why 'feeling' is said." 434


The Greater Series of Questions and Answers 389


Perception)

-"perception, perception/ is said, friend. With reference to
w hat is 'perception' said?"

'"It perceives, it perceives,' friend; that is why 'perception' is
said- What does it perceive? It perceives blue, it perceives yellow,
it perceives red, and it perceives white. 'It perceives, it perceives/
friend; that is why 'perception' is said." 435

9. "Peeling, perception, and consciousness, friend - are these
states conjoined or disjoined? And is it possible to separate each
of these states from the others in order to describe the difference
between them?"

"Feeling, perception, and consciousness, friend - these states
are conjoined, not disjoined, and it is impossible to separate each
of these states from the others in order to describe the difference
between them. For what one feels, that one perceives; and what
one perceives, that one cognizes. That is why these states are con-
joined, not disjoined, and it is impossible to separate each of
these states from the others in order to describe the difference
between them." 436


(KNOW ABLE BY MIND ALONE)

10. "Friend, what can be known by purified mind-consciousness
released from the five faculties?"

"Friend, by purified mind-consciousness released from the
five faculties the base of infinite space can be known thus; 'Space
is infinite'; the base of infinite consciousness can be known thus;
'Consciousness is infinite'; and the base of nothingness can be
known thus; 'There is nothing.'" 437

11. "Friend, with what does one understand a state that can
be known?"

"Friend, one understands a state that can be known with the
eye of wisdom." 438

12. "Friend, what is the purpose of wisdom?"

"The purpose of wisdom, friend, is direct knowledge, its pur-
pose is full understanding, its purpose is abandoning." 439


390 Mahavedalla Sutta: Sutta 43


£294

(right view)

[294] 13. "Friend, how many conditions are there for the arising
of right view?"

"Friend, there are two conditions for the arising of right view-
the voice of another and wise attention. These are the two condi-
tions for the arising of right view." 440

14. "Friend, by how many factors is right view assisted when it
has deliverance of mind for its fruit, deliverance of mind for its
fruit and benefit, when it has deliverance by wisdom for its fruit,
deliverance by wisdom for its fruit and benefit?"

"Friend, right view is assisted by five factors when it has deliv-
erance of mind for its fruit, deliverance of mind for its fruit and
benefit, when it has deliverance by wisdom for its fruit, deliver-
ance by wisdom for its fruit and benefit. Here, friend, right view
is assisted by virtue, learning, discussion, serenity, and insight.
Right view assisted by these five factors has deliverance of mind
for its fruit, deliverance of mind for its fruit and benefit; it has
deliverance by wisdom for its fruit, deliverance by wisdom for its
fruit and benefit ." 441

(being)

15. "Friend, how many kinds of being are there?"

"There are these three kinds of being, friend: sense-sphere
being, fine-material being, and immaterial being."

16. "Friend, how is renewal of being in the future generated?"
"Friend, renewal of being in the future is generated through

the delighting in this and that on the part of beings who are hin-
dered by ignorance and fettered by craving." 442

17. "Friend, how is renewal of being in the future not generated?"
"Friend, with the fading away of ignorance, with the arising of

true knowledge, and with the cessation of craving, renewal of
being in the future is not generated."

(the first jhana)

18. "Friend, what is the first jhana?"

"Here, friend, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in
the first jhana, which is accompanied by applied and sustained


The Greater Series of Questions and Answers 391


; ought- with rapture and pleasure bom of seclusion. This is
Pled the first jhana."

19 . "Friend, how many factors does the first jhana have?"

| "priend, the first jhana has five factors. Here, when a bhikkhu
k aS entered upon the first jhana, there occur applied thought,
sustained thought, rapture, pleasure, and unification of mind,
fhat is how the first jhana has five factors."

20. "Friend, how many factors are abandoned in the first jhana
and how many factors are possessed?"

"Friend, in the first jhana five factors are abandoned and five
factors are possessed. Here, when a bhikkhu has entered upon
the first jhana, sensual desire is abandoned, ill will is abandoned,
sloth and torpor are abandoned, restlessness and remorse [295]
are abandoned, and doubt is abandoned; and there occur applied
thought, sustained thought, rapture, pleasure, and unification of
mind. That is how in the first jhana five factors are abandoned
and five factors are possessed."


(the five faculties)

21. "Friend, these five faculties each have a separate field, a sepa-
rate domain, and do not experience each other's field and
domain, that is, the eye faculty, the ear faculty, the nose faculty,
the tongue faculty, and the body faculty. Now of these five facul-
ties, each having a separate field, a separate domain, not experi-
encing each other's field and domain, what is their resort, what
experiences their fields and domains?" 443

"Friend, these five faculties each have a separate field, a sepa-
rate domain, and do not experience each other's field and
domain, that is, the eye faculty, the ear faculty, the nose faculty,
the tongue faculty, and the body faculty. Now these five faculties,
each having a separate field, a separate domain, not experiencing
each other's field and domain, have mind as their resort, and
mind experiences their fields and domains."

22. "Friend, as to these five faculties - that is, the eye faculty,
the ear faculty, the nose faculty, the tongue faculty, and the body
faculty - what do these five faculties stand in dependence on?"

"Friend, as to these five faculties - that is, the eye faculty, the
e ar faculty, the nose faculty, the tongue faculty, and the body fac-
ulty - these five faculties stand in dependence on vitality." 444

"Friend, what does vitality stand in dependence on?"


392 MahS.vedalla Sutta: Sutta 43


i296


"Friend, as to these five faculties - that is, the eye faculty, the
ear faculty, the nose faculty, the tongue faculty, and the body
faculty - these five faculties stand in dependence on vitality.

"Friend, what does vitality stand in dependence on?"

"Vitality stands in dependence on heat." 445

"Friend, what does heat stand in dependence on?"

"Heat stands in dependence on vitality."

"Just now, friend, we understood the venerable Sariputta to
have said: 'Vitality stands in dependence on heat'; and now we
understand him to say: 'Heat stands in dependence on vitality.'
How should the meaning of these statements be regarded?"

"In that case, friend, I shall give you a simile, for some wise
men here understand the meaning of a statement by means of a
simile. Just as when an oil-lamp is burning, its radiance is seen
in dependence on its flame and its flame is seen in dependence
on its radiance; so too, vitality stands in dependence on heat and
heat stands in dependence on vitality."

(vital formations)

23. "Friend, are vital formations states of feeling or are vital for-
mations one thing and states of feeling another?" [296]

"Vital formations, friend, are not states of feeling. 446 If vital
formations were states of feeling, then when a bhikkhu has
entered upon the cessation of perception and feeling, he would
not be seen to emerge from it. Because vital formations are one
thing and states of feeling another, when a bhikkhu has entered
upon the cessation of perception and feeling, he can be seen to
emerge from it."

24. "Friend, when this body is bereft of how many states is it
then discarded and forsaken, left lying senseless like a log?" 447

"Friend, when this body is bereft of three states - vitality,
heat, and consciousness - it is then discarded and forsaken, left
lying senseless like a log."

25. "Friend, what is the difference between one who is dead,
who has completed his time, and a bhikkhu who has entered
upon the cessation of perception and feeling?"

"Friend, in the case of one who is dead, who has completed his
time, his bodily formations have ceased and subsided, his verbal
formations have ceased and subsided, his mental formations


have ceased and subsided, his vitality is exhausted, his heat has
keen dissipated, and his faculties are fully broken up. In the case
0 f a bhikkhu who has entered upon the cessation of perception
a nd feeling, his bodily formations have ceased and subsided, his
verbal formations have ceased and subsided, his mental forma-
tions have ceased and subsided, but his vitality is not exhausted,
his heat has not been dissipated, and his faculties become excep-
tionally clear. 448 This is the difference between one who is dead,
who has completed his time, and a bhikkhu who has entered
upon the cessation of perception and feeling."

(DELIVERANCE OF MIND)

26. "Friend, how many conditions are there for the attainment of
the neither-painful-nor-pleasant deliverance of mind?"

"Friend, there are four conditions for the attainment of the
neither-painful-nor-pleasant deliverance of mind: here, with
the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous dis-
appearance of joy and grief, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides
in the fourth jhana, which has neither-pain-nor-pleasure and
purity of mindfulness due to equanimity. These are the four
conditions for the attainment of the neither-painful-nor-pleasant
deliverance of mind."

27. "Friend, how many conditions are there for the attainment
of the signless deliverance of mind?"

"Friend, there are two conditions for the attainment of the
signless deliverance of mind: non-attention to all signs and
attention to the signless element. These are the two conditions
for the attainment of the signless deliverance of mind." 449

28. "Friend, how many conditions are there for the persistence
of the signless deliverance of mind?"

"Friend, there are three conditions for the persistence of the
signless deliverance of mind; [297] non-attention to all signs,
attention to the signless element, and the prior determination [of
its duration]. These are the three conditions for the persistence
of the signless deliverance of mind."

29. "Friend, how many conditions are there for emergence
from the signless deliverance of mind?"

"Friend, there are two conditions for emergence from the sign-
less deliverance of mind: attention to all signs and non-attention



394 Mahavedalla Sutta: Sutta 43


i 298


to the signless element. These are the two conditions for emer-
gence from the signless deliverance of mind."

30. "Friend, the immeasurable deliverance of mind, the deliv-
erance of mind through nothingness, the deliverance of mind
through voidness, and the signless deliverance of mind: are
these states different in meaning and different in name, or are
they one in meaning and different only in name?"

"Friend, the immeasurable deliverance of mind, the deliver-
ance of mind through nothingness, the deliverance of mind
through voidness, and the signless deliverance of mind: there is a
way in which these states are different in meaning and different
in name, and there is a way in which they are one in meaning
and different only in name.

31. "What, friend, is the way in which these states are different
in meaning and different in name? Here a bhikkhu abides per-
vading one quarter with a mind imbued with loving-kindness,
likewise the second, likewise the third, likewise the fourth; so
above, below, around, and everywhere, and to all as to himself,
he abides pervading the all-encompassing world with a mind
imbued with loving-kindness, abundant, exalted, immeasurable,
without hostility and without ill will. He abides pervading one
quarter with a mind imbued with compassion... He abides per-
vading one quarter with a mind imbued with appreciative
joy . . .He abides pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with
equanimity, likewise the second, likewise the third, likewise the
fourth; so above, below, around, and everywhere, and to all as to
himself, he abides pervading the all-encompassing world with a
mind imbued with equanimity, abundant, exalted, immeasur-
able, without hostility and without ill will. This is called the
immeasurable deliverance of mind.

32. "And what, friend, is the deliverance of mind through
nothingness? Here, with the complete surmounting of the base
of infinite consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing,' a
bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of nothingness. This
is called the deliverance of mind through nothingness.

33. "And what, friend, is the deliverance of mind through
voidness? Here a bhikkhu, gone to the forest or to the root of a
tree or to an empty hut, reflects thus: 'This is void of a self or of
what belongs to a self.' [298] This is called the deliverance of
mind through voidness. 450



The Greater Series of Questions and Answers 395


34. "And what, friend, is the signless deliverance of mind?
Jlere, with non-attention to all signs, a bhikkhu enters upon and
abides in the signless concentration of mind. This is called the


signless deliverance of mind. 451 This is the way in which these
states are different in meaning and different in name.

35. "And what, friend, is the way in which these states are one
in meaning and different only in name? Lust is a maker of mea-
surement, hate is a maker of measurement, delusion is a maker
of measurement. 452 In a bhikkhu whose taints are destroyed,
these are abandoned, cut off at the root, made like a palm
stump, done away with so that they are no longer subject to
future arising. Of all the kinds of immeasurable deliverance of
mind, the unshakeable deliverance of mind is pronounced the
best. Now that unshakeable deliverance of mind is void of lust,
void of hate, void of delusion. 453

36. "Lust is a something, hate is a something, delusion is a
something. 454 In a bhikkhu whose taints are destroyed, these are
abandoned, cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, done
away with so that they are no longer subject to future arising. Of
all the kinds of deliverance of mind through nothingness, the
unshakeable deliverance of mind is pronounced the best. 455
Now that unshakeable deliverance of mind is void of lust, void
of hate, void of delusion.

37. "Lust is a maker of signs, hate is a maker of signs, delusion
is a maker of signs. 456 In a bhikkhu whose taints are destroyed,
these are abandoned, cut off at the root, made like a palm
stump, done away with so that they are no longer subject to
future arising. Of all the kinds of signless deliverance of mind,
the unshakeable deliverance of mind is pronounced the best. 457
Now that unshakeable deliverance of mind is void of lust, void
of hate, void of delusion. This is the way in which these states
are one in meaning and different only in name." 458

That is what the venerable Sariputta said. The venerable Maha
Kotthita was satisfied and delighted in the venerable Sariputta's
words.


44 Culavedalla Sutta
The Shorter Series of
Questions and Answers


[299] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One
was living at Rajagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels'
Sanctuary. Then the lay follower Visakha went to the bhikkhunl
Dhammadinna, 459 and after paying homage to her, he sat down
at one side and asked her:

(personality)

2. "Lady, 'personality, personality' is said. What is called per-
sonality by the Blessed One?"

"Friend Visakha, these five aggregates affected by clinging
are called personality by the Blessed One; that is, the material
form aggregate affected by clinging, the feeling aggregate
affected by clinging, the perception aggregate affected by
clinging, the formations aggregate affected by clinging, and
the consciousness aggregate affected by clinging. These five
aggregates affected by clinging are called personality by the
Blessed One." 460

Saying, "Good, lady," the lay follower Visakha delighted and
rejoiced in the bhikkhunl Dhammadinna's words. Then he
asked her a further question: ■

3. "Lady, 'origin of personality, origin of personality' is said.
What is called the origin of personality by the Blessed One?"

"Friend Visakha, it is craving, which brings renewal of being,
is accompanied by delight and lust, and delights in this and that;
that is, craving for sensual pleasures, craving for being, and
craving for non-being. This is called the origin of personality by
the Blessed One."


396


The Shorter Series of Questions and Answers 397


4 "Lady, 'cessation of personality, cessation of personality'
F.' g sa id. What is called the cessation of personality by the
Blessed One?

"Friend Visakha, it is the remainderless fading away and ceas-
ing/ the giving U P/ relinquishing, letting go, and rejecting of that
same craving. This is called the cessation of personality by the
Blessed One."

5. "Lady, 'the way leading to the cessation of personality, the
way leading to the cessation of personality' is said. What is
called the way leading to the cessation of personality by the
Blessed One?"

"Friend Visakha, it is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is,
right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right liveli-
hood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration."

6. "Lady, is that clinging the same as these five aggregates
affected by clinging, or is the clinging something apart from the
five aggregates affected by clinging?"

"Friend Visakha, that clinging is neither the same as these five
aggregates affected by clinging [300] nor is clinging something
apart from the five aggregates affected by clinging. It is the
desire and lust in regard to the five aggregates affected by cling-
ing that is the clinging there." 461


(personality view)

7. "Lady, how does personality view come to be?"

"Here, friend Visakha, an untaught ordinary person, who has
no regard for noble ones and is unskilled and undisciplined in
their Dhamma, who has no regard for true men and is unskilled
and undisciplined in their Dhamma, regards material form as
self, or self as possessed of material form, or material form as in
self, or self as in material form. He regards feeling as self, or self
as possessed of feeling, or feeling as in self, or self as in feeling.
He regards perception as self, or self as possessed of perception,
or perception as in self, or self as in perception. He regards for-
mations as self, or self as possessed of formations, or formations
as in self, or self as in formations. He regards consciousness as
self, or self as possessed of consciousness, or consciousness as in


398 Cttlavedalla Sutta: Sutta 44


i30i


I self, or self as in consciousness. That is how personality view

I comes to be." 462

1 8. "Lady, how does personality view not come to be?"

1 "Here, friend Visakha, a well-taught noble disciple, who has

regard for noble ones and is skilled and disciplined in their
Dhamma, who has regard for true men and is skilled and disci-
plined in their Dhamma, does not regard material form as self,
or self as possessed of material form, or material form as in
self, or self as in material form. He does not regard feeling as
self, or self as possessed of feeling, or feeling as in self, or self
as in feeling. He does not regard perception as self, or self as
possessed of perception, or perception as in self, or self as in
perception. He does not regard formations as self, or self as
possessed of formations, or formations as in self, or self as in
formations. He does not regard consciousness as self, or self as
possessed of consciousness, or consciousness as in self, or self
as in consciousness. That is how personality view does not
come to be."

(the noble eightfold path)

9. "Lady, what is the Noble Eightfold Path?"

"Friend Visakha, it is just this Noble Eightfold Path; that is,
right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right liveli-
hood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration."

10. "Lady, is the Noble Eightfold Path conditioned or
unconditioned?" ,

"Friend Visakha, the Noble Eightfold Path is [301] conditioned."

11. "Lady, are the three aggregates included by the Noble
Eightfold Path, or is the Noble Eightfold Path included by the
three aggregates?" 463

"The three aggregates are not included by the Noble
Eightfold Path, friend Visakha, but the Noble Eightfold Path is
included by the three aggregates. Right speech, right action,
and right livelihood - these states are included in the aggregate
of virtue. Right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentra-
tion - these states are included in the aggregate of concentra-
tion. Right view and right intention - these states are included
in the aggregate of wisdom."


The Shorter Series of Questions and Answers 399


Concentration)

12 . "Lady, what is concentration? What is the basis of concentra-
tion? What is the equipment of concentration? What is the
development of concentration?"

"Unification of mind, friend Visakha, is concentration; the
four foundations of mindfulness are the basis of concentration;
the four right kinds of striving are the equipment of concentra-
tion; the repetition, development, and cultivation of these same
states is the development of concentration therein." 464

(formations)

13. "Lady, how many formations are there?"

"There are these three formations, friend Visakha: the bodily
formation, the verbal formation, and the mental formation."

14. "But, lady, what is the bodily formation? What is the ver-
bal formation? What is the mental formation?"

"In-breathing and out-breathing, friend Visakha, are the bodily
formation; applied thought and sustained thought are the verbal
formation; perception and feeling are the mental formation." 465

15. "But, lady, why are in-breathing and out-breathing the
bodily formation? Why are applied thought and sustained
thought the verbal formation? Why are perception and feeling
the mental formation?"

"Friend Visakha, in-breathing and out-breathing are bodily,
these are states bound up with the body; that is why in-breathing
and out-breathing are the bodily formation. First one applies
thought and sustains thought, and subsequently one breaks out
into speech; that is why applied thought and sustained thought
are the verbal formation. Perception and feeling are mental,
these are states bound up with the mind; that is why perception
and feeling are the mental formation. " v>6


(the attainment of cessation)

16. "Lady, how does the attainment of the cessation of percep-
tion and feeling come to be?"

"Friend Visakha, when a bhikkhu is attaining the cessation of



400 Cttlavedalla Sutta : Sutta 44


i 302


perception and feeling, it does not occur to him: 'I shall attain
the cessation of perception and feeling,' or 'I am attaining the
cessation of perception and feeling/ or 'I have attained the ces-
sation of perception and feeling'; but rather his mind has previ-
ously been developed in such a way that it leads him to that
state." 467 [302]

17. "Lady, when a bhikkhu is attaining the cessation of per-
ception and feeling, which states cease first in him: the bodily
formation, the verbal formation, or the mental formation?"

"Friend Visakha, when a bhikkhu is attaining the cessation of
perception and feeling, first the verbal formation ceases, then
the bodily formation, then the mental formation." 468

18. "Lady, how does emergence from the attainment of the
cessation of perception and feeling come to be?"

"Friend Visakha, when a bhikkhu is emerging from the attain-
ment of the cessation of perception and feeling, it does not occur
to him: 'I shall emerge from the attainment of the cessation of
perception and feeling,' or 'I am emerging from the attainment
of the cessation of perception and feeling/ or 'I have emerged
from the attainment of the cessation of perception and feeling';
but rather his mind has previously been developed in such a
way that it leads him to that state." 469

19. "Lady, when a bhikkhu is emerging from the attainment
of the cessation of perception and feeling, which states arise
first in him: the bodily formation, the verbal formation, or the
mental formation?"

"Friend Visakha, whert a bhikkhu is emerging from the attain-
ment of the cessation of perception and feeling, first the mental
formation arises, then the bodily formation, then the verbal
formation." 470

20. "Lady, when a bhikkhu has emerged from the attainment
of the cessation of perception and feeling, how many kinds of
contact touch him?"

"Friend Visakha, when a bhikkhu has emerged from the
attainment of the cessation of perception and feeling, three
kinds of contact touch him: voidness contact, signless contact,
desireless contact." 471

21. "Lady, when a bhikkhu has emerged from the attainment
of the cessation of perception and feeling, to what does his mind
incline, to what does it lean, to what does it tend?"


The Shorter Series of Questions and Answers 401


i303

Friend Visakha, when a bhikkhu has emerged from the
attainment of the cessation of perception and feeling, his mind
inclines to seclusion, leans to seclusion, tends to seclusion." 472

(feeling)

22. "Lady, how many kinds of feeling are there?"

"Friend Visakha, there are three kinds of feeling: pleasant feel-
ing, painful feeling, and neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling."

23. "But, lady, what is pleasant feeling? What is painful feel-
ing? What is neither painful-nor-pleasant feeling?"

"Friend Visakha, whatever is felt bodily or mentally as pleas-
ant and soothing is pleasant feeling. Whatever is felt bodily or
mentally as painful and hurting is painful feeling. Whatever is
felt bodily or mentally as neither soothing nor hurting [303] is
neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling. "

24. "Lady, what is pleasant and what is painful in regard to
pleasant feeling? What is painful and what is pleasant in regard
to painful feeling? What is pleasant and what is painful in
regard to neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling?"

"Friend Visakha, pleasant feeling is pleasant when it persists
and painful when it changes. Painful feeling is painful when it
persists and pleasant when it changes. Neither-painful-nor-
pleasant feeling is pleasant when there is knowledge [of it] and
painful when there is no knowledge [of it]."

(underlying tendencies)

25. "Lady, what underlying tendency underlies pleasant feeling?
What underlying tendency underlies painful feeling? What under-
lying tendency underlies neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling?"

"Friend Visakha, the underlying tendency to lust underlies
pleasant feeling. The underlying tendency to aversion underlies
painful feeling. The underlying tendency to ignorance underlies
neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling. " 473

26. "Lady, does the underlying tendency to lust underlie all
pleasant feeling? Does the underlying tendency to aversion
underlie all painful feeling? Does the underlying tendency to
ignorance underlie all neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling?"

"Friend Visakha, the underlying tendency to lust does not


402 Cfilavedalla Sutta: Sutta 44



underlie all pleasant feeling. The underlying tendency to
aversion does not underlie all painful feeling. The underlying
tendency to ignorance does not underlie all neither-painful-nor-
pleasant feeling."

27. "Lady, what should be abandoned in regard to pleasant
feeling? What should be abandoned in regard to painful feeling?
What should be abandoned in regard to neither-painful-nor-
pleasant feeling?"

"Friend Visakha, the underlying tendency to lust should be aban-
doned in regard to pleasant feeling. The underlying tendency
to aversion should be abandoned in regard to painful feeling. The
underlying tendency to ignorance should be abandoned in regard
to neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling."

28. "Lady, does the underlying tendency to lust have to be aban-
doned in regard to all pleasant feeling? Does the underlying ten-
dency to aversion have to be abandoned in regard to all painful
feeling? Does the underlying tendency to ignorance have to be
abandoned in regard to all neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling?"

"Friend Visakha, the underlying tendency to lust does not
have to be abandoned in regard to all pleasant feeling. The
underlying tendency to aversion does not have to be abandoned
in regard to all painful feeling. The underlying tendency to igno-
rance does not have to be abandoned in regard to all neither-
painful-nor-pleasant feeling.

"Here, friend Visakha, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and
abides in the first jhana, which is accompanied by applied and
sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure bom of seclusion.
With that he abandons lust, and the underlying tendency to lust
does not underlie that. 474

"Here a bhikkhu considers thus: 'When shall I enter upon and
abide in that base that the noble ones now enter upon and abide
in?' In one who thus generates a longing for the supreme libera-
tions, [304] grief arises with that longing as condition. With that
he abandons aversion, and the underlying tendency to aversion
does not underlie that. 475

"Here, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with
the previous disappearance of joy and grief, a bhikkhu enters
upon and abides in the fourth jhana, which has neither-pain-
nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity. With


1304


The Shorter Series of Questions and Answers 403


that he abandons ignorance, and the underlying tendency to
ignorance does not underlie that." 476

(COUNTERPARTS)

29. "Lady, what is the counterpart of pleasant feeling?" 477
"Friend Visakha, painful feeling is the counterpart of pleasant

feeling."

"What is the counterpart of painful feeling?"

"Pleasant feeling is the counterpart of painful feeling."

"What is the counterpart of neither-painful-nor -pleasant
feeling?"

"Ignorance is the counterpart of neither-painful-nor pleasant
feeling." 478

"What is the counterpart of ignorance?"

"True knowledge is the counterpart of ignorance."

"What is the counterpart of true knowledge?"

"Deliverance is the counterpart of true knowledge."

"What is the counterpart of deliverance?"

"Nibbana is the counterpart of deliverance."

"Lady, what is the counterpart of Nibbana?"

"Friend Visakha, you have pushed this line of questioning too
far; you were not able to grasp the limit to questions. 479 For the
holy life, friend Visakha, merges in Nibbana, culminates in
Nibbana, ends in Nibbana. If you wish, friend Visakha, go to the
Blessed One and ask him about the meaning of this. As the
Blessed One explains it to you, so you should remember it."

(conclusion)

30. Then the lay follower Visakha, having delighted and rejoiced
in the bhikkhunl Dhamma dinna 's words, rose from his seat, and
after paying homage to her, keeping her on his right, he went to
the Blessed One. After paying homage to him, he sat down at
one side and told the Blessed One his entire conversation with
the bhikkhunl Dhammadinna. When he finished speaking, the
Blessed One told him:

31. "The bhikkhunl Dhammadinna is wise, Visakha, the
bhikkhunl Dhammadinna has great wisdom. If you had asked
me the meaning of this, I would have explained it to you [305] in


j


f

!

I

j

|

I

!

I

i


404 Culavedalla Sutta: Sutta 44 i 305


the same way that the bhikkhunl Dhammadinna has explained
it. Such is its meaning, and so you should remember it." 480

That is what the Blessed One said. The lay follower Visakha was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


45 Culadhammasamadana Sutta
The Shorter Discourse on Ways of
Undertaking Things


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Savatthl in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There he
addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, there are four ways of undertaking things. What
are the four? There is a way of undertaking things that is pleasant
now and ripens in the future as pain. There is a way of undertak-
ing things that is painful now and ripens in the future as pain.
There is a way of undertaking things that is painful now and
ripens in the future as pleasure. There is a way of undertaking
things that is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pleasure.

3. "What, bhikkhus, is the way of undertaking things that is
pleasant now and ripens in the future as pain? Bhikkhus, there
are certain recluses and brahmins whose doctrine and view is
this: 'There is no harm in sensual pleasures.' They take to gulp-
ing down sensual pleasures and divert themselves with women
wanderers who wear their hair bound in a topknot. They say
thus: 'What future fear do these good recluses and brahmins see
in sensual pleasures when they speak of abandoning sensual
pleasures and describe the full understanding of sensual plea-
sures? Pleasant is the touch of this woman wanderer's tender
soft downy arm!' Thus they take to gulping down sensual plea-
sures, and having done so, on the dissolution of the body, after
death, they reappear in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy
destination, in perdition, even in hell. There they feel painful,
racking, piercing feelings. They say thus: 'This is the future fear
those good recluses and brahmins saw in sensual pleasures
when they spoke of abandoning sensual pleasures and
described the full understanding of sensual pleasures. For it is
by reason of sensual pleasures, [306] owing to sensual pleasures.


405


406 Culadhammasamadana Sutta: Sutta 45


i308


that we are now feeling painful, racking, piercing feelings.'

4. "Bhikkhus, suppose that in the last month of the hot season
a maluva-creeper pod burst open and a maluva-creeper seed fell
at the foot of a sala tree. Then a deity living in that tree became
fearful, perturbed, and frightened; but the deity's friends and
companions, kinsmen and relatives - garden deities, park deities
tree deities, and deities inhabiting medicinal herbs, grass, and
forest-monarch trees - gathered together and reassured that
deity thus: 'Have no fear, sir, have no fear. Perhaps a peacock
will swallow the maluva-creeper seed or a wild animal will eat it
or a forest fire will bum it or woodsmen will carry it off or white
ants will devour it or it may not even be fertile.' But no peacock
swallowed that seed, no wild animal ate it, no forest fire burned
it, no woodsmen carried it off, no white ants devoured it, and it
was in fact fertile. Then, being moistened by rain from a rain-
bearing cloud, the seed in due course sprouted and the maluva
creeper's tender soft downy tendril wound itself around that sala
tree. Then the deity living in the sala tree thought: 'What future
fear did my friends and companions, kinsmen and relatives... see
in that maluva-creeper seed when they gathered together and
reassured me as they did? Pleasant is the touch of this maluva
creeper's tender soft downy tendril!' Then the creeper enfolded
the sala tree, made a canopy over it, draped a curtain all around
it, and split the main branches of the tree. The deity who lived in
the tree then realised: 'This is the future fear they saw in that
maluva-creeper seed. [307] Because of that maluva-creeper seed I
am now feeling painful, tacking, piercing feelings.'

"So too, bhikkhus, there are certain recluses and brahmins
whose doctrine and view is this: 'There is no harm in sensual plea-
sures.'. . .They say thus: 'This is the future fear those good recluses
and brahmins saw in sensual pleasures.. .that we are now feeling
painful, racking, piercing feelings.' This is called the way of under-
taking things that is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pain.

5. "And what, bhikkhus, is the way of undertaking things that
is painful now and ripens in the future as pain? Here, bhikkhus,
someone goes naked, rejecting conventions, licking his hands,
not coming when asked, not stopping when asked. ..{as Sutta 12/
§45) [308]. ..He dwells pursuing the practice of bathing in water
three times daily including the evening. Thus in such a variety


The Shorter Discourse on Ways of Undertaking Things 407


I lf way s he dwells pursuing the practice of tormenting and mor-
jjfying the body. On the dissolution of the body, after death, he
te appears in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination,
jj! perdition, even in hell. This is called the way of undertaking
things that is painful now and ripens in the future as pain.

6. "And what, bhikkhus, is the way of undertaking things that
is painful now and ripens in the future as pleasure? Here,
bhikkhus, someone by nature has strong lust, and he constantly
experiences pain and grief born of lust; by nature he has strong
bate, and he constantly experiences pain and grief born of hate;
I by nature he has strong delusion, and he constantly experiences
| pain and grief bom of delusion. Yet in pain and grief, weeping
: with tearful face, he leads the perfect and pure holy life. On the
; dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears in a happy
destination, even in the heavenly world. This is called the way
of undertaking things that is painful now and ripens in the
; future as pleasure.

| 7. "And what, bhikkhus, is the way of undertaking things that

; is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pleasure? Here,
| bhikkhus, someone by nature does not have strong lust, and he
does not constantly experience pain and grief born of lust; by
; nature he does not have strong hate, and he does not constantly
experience pain and grief born of hate; by nature he does not
| have strong delusion, [309] and he does not constantly experi-
| ence pain and grief bom of delusion. Quite secluded from sen-
| sual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, he enters
upon and abides in the first jhana...With the stilling of applied
and sustained thought, he enters upon and abides in the second
, >jhana. . .With the fading away as well of rapture. . .he enters upon
; and abides in the third jhana...With the abandoning of pleasure
and pain... he enters upon and abides in the fourth jhana...On
; 'the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears in a happy
! destination, even in the heavenly world. This is called the way
°f undertaking things that is pleasant now and ripens in the
'tutu re as pleasure. These, bhikkhus, are the four ways of under-
taking things."

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
a ud delighted in the Blessed One's words.



46 Mahadhammasamadana Sutta
The Greater Discourse on Ways of
Undertaking Things


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Savatthl in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There he
addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir/'
they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, for the most part beings have this wish, desire,
and longing: 'If only unwished for, undesired, disagreeable
things would diminish and wished for, desired, agreeable things
would increase!' Yet although beings have this wish, desire, and
longing, unwished for, undesired, disagreeable things increase
for them and wished for, desired, agreeable things diminish.
Now, bhikkhus, what do you think is the reason for that?"

"Venerable sir, our teachings are rooted in the Blessed One,
[310] guided by the Blessed One, have the Blessed One as their
resort. It would be good if the Blessed One would explain the
meaning of these words. Having heard it from the Blessed One,
the bhikkhus will remember it."

"Then listen, bhikkhus, and attend closely to what I shall say."

"Yes, venerable sir," they replied. The Blessed One said this:

3. "Here, bhikkhus, an untaught ordinary person who has no
regard for noble ones and is unskilled and undisciplined in their
Dhamma, who has no regard for true men and is unskilled and
undisciplined in their Dhamma, does not know what things
should be cultivated and what things should not be cultivated,
he does not know what things should be followed and what
things should not be followed. Not knowing this, he cultivates
things that should not be cultivated and does not cultivate things
that should be cultivated, he follows things that should not be
followed and does not follow things that should be followed-

It is because he does this that unwished for, undesired, disagree-
able things increase for him and wished for, desired, agreeable


408


|j j The Greater Discourse on Ways of Undertaking Things 409

ngs diminish. Why is that? That is what happens to one who
es not see.

B 4 . "The well-taught noble disciple who has regard for noble
0 nes and is skilled and disciplined in their Dhamma, who has
egard for true men and is skilled and disciplined in their
}hamma, knows what things should be cultivated and what
1 things should not be cultivated, he knows what things should be
I -followed and what things should not be followed. Knowing this,
fhe cultivates things that should be cultivated and does not culti-
rvate things that should not be cultivated, he follows things that
l should be followed and does not follow things that should not
I he followed. It is because he does this that unwished for, unde-
sired, disagreeable things diminish for him and wished for,
desired, agreeable things increase. Why is that? That is what
happens to one who sees.

5. "Bhikkhus, there are four ways of undertaking things. What
- toe the four? There is a way of undertaking things that is painful
[ now and ripens in the future as pain. There is [311] a way of
; undertaking things that is pleasant now and ripens in the future as
i pain. There is a way of undertaking things that is painful now and
j ‘ripens in the future as pleasure. There is a way of undertaking
I things that is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pleasure.

|(the ignorant person)

6 . (1) "Now, bhikkhus, one who is ignorant, not knowing this
ray of undertaking things that is painful now and ripens in the
Ifuture as pain, does not understand it as it actually is thus: 'This
ray of undertaking things is painful now and ripens in the
future as pain.' Not knowing it, not understanding it as it
ctually is, the ignorant one cultivates it and does not avoid it;
ecause he does so, unwished for, undesired, disagreeable
a gs increase for him and wished for, desired, agreeable things
diminish. Why is that? That is what happens to one who does
" 3 t see.

j* 7 - (2) "Now, bhikkhus, one who is ignorant, not knowing this
a y of undertaking things that is pleasant now and ripens in the
Wure as pain, does not understand it as it actually is thus: 'This
Va y of undertaking things is pleasant now and ripens in the
4ture as pain.' Not knowing it, not understanding it as it actually


3


410 Mahadhammasamadana Sutta: Sutta 46


i 312


is, the ignorant one cultivates it and does not avoid it; because
he does so, unwished for... things increase for him and wished
for... things diminish. Why is that? That is what happens to one
who does not see.

8. (3) "Now, bhikkhus, one who is ignorant, not knowing this
way of undertaking things that is painful now and ripens in the
future as pleasure, does not understand it as it actually is thus:
'This way of undertaking things is painful now and ripens in the
future as pleasure.' Not knowing it, not understanding it as it
actually is, the ignorant one does not cultivate it but avoids it;
because he does so, unwished for... things increase for him and
wished for. . .things diminish. Why is that? That is what happens
to one who does not see.

9. (4) "Now, bhikkhus, one who is ignorant, not knowing the
way of undertaking things that is pleasant now and ripens in
the future as pleasure, does not understand it as it actually is
thus: 'This way of undertaking things is pleasant now and
ripens in the future as pleasure.' Not knowing it, not under-
standing it as it actually is, the ignorant one does not cultivate it
but avoids it; because he does so, [312] unwished for... things
increase for him and wished for... things diminish. Why is that?
That is what happens to one who does not see.

(the wise person)

10. (1) "Now, bhikkhus, £>ne who is wise, knowing this way of
undertaking things that is painful now and ripens in the future
as pain, understands it as it actually is thus: 'This way of under-
taking things is painful now and ripens in the future as pain.'
Knowing it, understanding it as it actually is, the wise one does
not cultivate it but avoids it; because he does so, unwished for,
undesired, disagreeable things diminish for him and wished for,
desired, agreeable things increase. Why is that? That is what
happens to one who sees.

11. (2) "Now, bhikkhus, one who is wise, knowing this way of
undertaking things that is pleasant now and ripens in the future
as pain, understands it as it actually is thus: 'This way of under-
taking things is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pain.'
Knowing it, understanding it as it actually is, the wise one does


1313 The Greater Discourse on Ways of Undertaking Things 411

not cultivate it but avoids it; because he does so, unwished
for... things diminish for him and wished for... things increase.
Why is that? That is what happens to one who sees.

12. (3) "Now, bhikkhus, one who is wise, knowing this way of
undertaking things that is painful now and ripens in the future
as pleasure, understands it as it actually is thus: 'This way of
undertaking things is painful now and ripens in the future as
pleasure.' Knowing it, understanding it as it actually is, the wise
one does not avoid it but cultivates it; because he does so,
unwished for things... diminish for him and wished for... things
increase. Why is that? That is what happens to one who sees.

13. (4) "Now, bhikkhus, one who is wise, knowing this way
of undertaking things that is pleasant now and ripens in the
future as pleasure, understands it as it actually is thus: 'This
way of undertaking things is pleasant now and ripens in the
future as pleasure.' Knowing it, understanding it as it actually
is, the wise one does not avoid it but cultivates it; because he
does so, unwished for... things diminish for him and wished
for... things increase. Why is that? That is what happens to one
who sees. [313]

(the four ways)

14. (1) "What, bhikkhus, is the way of undertaking things that is
painful now and ripens in the future as pain? Here, bhikkhus,
someone in pain and grief kills living beings, and he experiences
pain and grief that have killing of living beings as condition. In
pain and grief he takes what is not given... misconducts himself
in sensual pleasures... speaks falsehood... speaks maliciously...
speaks harshly. ..gossips. ..is covetous. ..has a mind of ill
will... holds wrong view, and he experiences pain and grief that
have wrong view as condition. On the dissolution of the body,
after death, he reappears in a state of deprivation, in an unhap-
py destination, in perdition, even in hell. This is called the way
of undertaking things that is painful now and ripens in the
future as pain.

15. (2) "What, bhikkhus, is the way of undertaking things that
is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pain? Here, bhik-
khus, someone in pleasure and joy kills living beings, and he


\


i 315


412 MaMdhammasamadana Sutta: Sutta 46


experiences pleasure and joy that have killing of living beings as
condition. In pleasure and joy he takes what is not given...
[314]... holds wrong view, and he experiences pleasure and joy
that have wrong view as condition. On the dissolution of the
body, after death, he reappears in a state of deprivation, in an
unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell. This is called the
way of undertaking things that is pleasant now and ripens in
the future as pain.

16. (3) "What, bhikkhus, is the way of undertaking things that
is painful now and ripens in the future as pleasure? Here,
bhikkhus, someone in pain and grief abstains from killing living
beings, and he experiences pain and grief that have abstention
from killing living beings as condition. In pain and grief he
abstains from taking what is not given... from misconduct in
sensual pleasures... from speaking falsehood .. .from speaking
maliciously. . .from speaking harshly. . .from gossiping. . .he is not
covetous... he does not have a mind of ill will... [315]... he holds
right view, and he experiences pain and grief that have right
view as condition. On the dissolution of the body, after death,
he reappears in a happy destination, even in the heavenly
world. This is called the way of undertaking things that is
painful now and ripens in the future as pleasure.

17. (4) "What, bhikkhus, is the way of undertaking things that
is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pleasure? Here,
bhikkhus, someone in pleasure and joy abstains from killing liv-
ing beings, and he experiences pleasure and joy that have
abstention from killing hVing beings as condition. In pleasure
and joy he abstains from taking what is not given... he holds
right view, and he experiences pleasure and joy that have right
view as condition. On the dissolution of the body, after death,
he reappears in a happy destination, even in the heavenly
world. This is called the way of undertaking things that is pleas-
ant now and ripens in the future as pleasure.


(the similes)

18. (1) "Bhikkhus, suppose there were a bitter gourd mixed with
poison, and a man came who wanted to live, not to die, who
wanted pleasure and recoiled from pain, and they told him:
'Good man, this bitter gourd is mixed with poison. Drink from it


i 317 The Greater Discourse on Ways of Undertaking Things 413


if you want; [316] as you drink from it, its colour, smell, and
taste will not agree with you, and after drinking from it, you
will come to death or deadly suffering/ Then he drank from it
without reflecting and did not relinquish it. As he drank from it,
its colour, smell, and taste did not agree with him, and after
drinking from it, he came to death or deadly suffering. Similar
to that, I say, is the way of undertaking things that is painful
now and ripens in the future as pain.

19. (2) "Suppose there were a bronze cup of beverage pos-
sessing a good colour, smell, and taste, but it was mixed with
poison, and a man came who wanted to live, not to die, who
wanted pleasure and recoiled from pain, and they told him:
'Good man, this bronze cup of beverage possesses a good
colour, smell, and taste, but it is mixed with poison. Drink from
it if you want; as you drink from it, its colour, smell, and taste
will agree with you, but after drinking from it, you will come to
death or deadly suffering.’ Then he drank from it without
reflecting and did not relinquish it. As he drank from it, its
colour, smell, and taste agreed with him, but after drinking from
it, he came to death or deadly suffering. Similar to that, I say, is
the way of undertaking things that is pleasant now and ripens
in the future as pain.

20. (3) "Suppose there were fermented urine mixed with vari-
ous medicines, and a man came sick with jaundice, and they
told him: 'Good man, this fermented urine is mixed with vari-
ous medicines. Drink from it if you want; as you drink from it,
its colour, smell, and taste will not agree with you, but after
drinking from it, you will be well.' Then he drank from it after
reflecting, and did not relinquish it. As he drank from it, its
colour, taste, and smell did not agree with him, but after drink-
ing from it, he became well. Similar to that, I say, is the way of
undertaking things that is painful now and ripens in the future
as pleasure.

21. (4) "Suppose there were curd, honey, ghee, and molasses
mixed together, and a man with dysentery came, and they told
him: 'Good man, [317] this is curd, honey, ghee, and molasses
mixed together. Drink from it if you want; as you drink from it,
its colour, smell, and taste will agree with you, and after drink-
ing from it you will be well.' Then he drank from it after reflect-
ing, and did not relinquish it. As he drank from it, its colour,


414 Mahadhammasamad&na Sutta: Sutta 46


i 317


smell, and taste agreed with him, and after drinking from it, he
became well. Similar to that, I say, is the way of undertaking
things that is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pleasure.

22. "Just as, in autumn, in the last month of the rainy season,
when the sky is clear and cloudless, the sun rises above the
earth dispelling all darkness from space with its shining and
beaming and radiance, so too, the way of undertaking things
that is pleasant now and ripens in the future as pleasure dispels
with its shining and beaming and radiance any other doctrines
whatsoever of ordinary recluses and brahmins."

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.



47 Vimamsaka Sutta
The Inquirer


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There he
addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who is an inquirer, not knowing
how to gauge another's mind, 482 should make an investigation
of the Tathagata in order to find out whether or not he is fully
enlightened."

3. "Venerable sir, our teachings are rooted in the Blessed One,
guided by the Blessed One, have the Blessed One as their resort.
It would be good if the Blessed One would explain the meaning
of these words. Having heard it from the Blessed One, the
bhikkhus will remember it."

I "Then listen, bhikkhus, and attend closely to [318] what I
shall say."

"Yes, venerable sir," the bhikkhus replied. The Blessed One
said this:

4. "Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu who is an inquirer, not knowing how
to gauge another's mind, should investigate the Tathagata with
respect to two kinds of states, states cognizable through the eye
and through the ear thus: 'Are there found in the Tathagata or
not any defiled states cognizable through the eye or through the
ear?' 483 When he investigates him, he comes to know: 'No
defiled states cognizable through the eye or through the ear are
found in the Tathagata.'

5. "When he comes to know this, he investigates him further
thus: 'Are there found in the Tathagata or not any mixed states

, , cognizable through the eye or through the ear?' 484 When he

II investigates him, he comes to know: 'No mixed states cognizable

H through the eye or through the ear are found in the Tathagata.'

i




416 Vlmamsaka Sutta: Sutta 47


i3l9


6. "When he comes to know this, he investigates him further
thus: 'Are there found in the Tathagata or not cleansed states
cognizable through the eye or through the ear?' When he inves-
tigates him, he comes to know: 'Cleansed states cognizable
through the eye or through Hie ear are found in the Tathagata.'

7. "When he comes to know this, he investigates him further
thus: 'Has this venerable one attained this wholesome state over
a long time or did he attain it recently?' When he investigates
him, he comes to know: 'This venerable one has attained this
wholesome state over a long time; he did not attain it only
recently.'

8. "When he comes to know this, he investigates him further
thus: 'Has this venerable one acquired renown and attained
fame, so that the dangers [connected with renown and fame] are
found in him?' For, bhikkhus, as long as a bhikkhu has not
acquired renown and attained fame, the dangers [connected
with renown and fame] are not found in him; but when he has
acquired renown and attained fame, those dangers are found in
him. 485 When he investigates him, he comes to know: 'This ven-
erable one has acquired renown and attained fame, but the dan-
gers [connected with renown and fame] are not found in him.'

9. "When he comes to know this, [319] he investigates him
further thus: 'Is this venerable one restrained without fear, not
restrained by fear, and does he avoid indulging in sensual plea-
sures because he is without lust through the destruction of lust?'
When he investigates him, he comes to know: 'This venerable
one is restrained without fear, not restrained by fear, and he
avoids indulging in sensual pleasure because he is without lust
through the destruction of lust.'

10. "Now, bhikkhus, if others should ask that bhikkhu thus:
'What are the venerable one’s reasons and what is his evidence
whereby he says: "That venerable one is restrained without fear,
not restrained by fear, and he avoids indulging in sensual plea-
sures because he is without lust through the destruction of
lust"?' - answering rightly, that bhikkhu would answer thus:
'Whether that venerable one dwells in the Sangha or alone,
while some there are well-behaved and some are ill-behaved
and some there teach a group, 486 while some here are seen con-
cerned about material things and some are unsullied by material
things, still that venerable one does not despise anyone because


0 f that. 487 And I have heard and learned this from the Blessed
One's own lips: "I am restrained without fear, not restrained by
fear, and I avoid indulging in sensual pleasures because I am
without lust through the destruction of lust.'"

11. "The Tathagata, bhikkhus, should be questioned further
about that thus: 'Are there found in the Tathagata or not any
defiled states cognizable through the eye or through the ear?'
The Tathagata would answer thus: 'No defiled states cognizable
through the eye or through the ear are found in the Tathagata.'

12. "If asked, 'Are there found in the Tathagata or not any
mixed states cognizable through the eye or through the ear?' the
Tathagata would answer thus: 'No mixed states cognizable
through the eye or through the ear are found in the Tathagata.'

13. "If asked, 'Are there found in the Tathagata or not
cleansed states cognizable through the eye or through the ear?'
the Tathagata would answer thus: 'Cleansed states cognizable
through the eye or through the ear are found in the Tathagata.
They are my pathway and my domain, yet I do not identify
with them.' 488

14. "Bhikkhus, a disciple should approach the Teacher who
speaks thus in order to hear the Dhamma. The Teacher teaches
him the Dhamma with its higher and higher levels, with its more
and more sublime levels, with its dark and bright counterparts.
As the Teacher teaches the Dhamma to a bhikkhu in this way,
through direct knowledge of a certain teaching here in that
Dhamma, [320] the bhikkhu comes to a conclusion about the
teachings. 489 He places confidence in the Teacher thus: 'The
Blessed One is fully enlightened, the Dhamma is well proclaimed
by the Blessed One, the Sangha is practising the good way.'

15. "Now if others should ask that bhikkhu thus: 'What are
the venerable one's reasons and what is his evidence whereby
he says, "The Blessed One is fully enlightened, the Dhamma is
well proclaimed by the Blessed One, the Sangha is practising the
good way"?' - answering rightly, that bhikkhu would answer
thus: 'Here, friends, I approached the Blessed One in order to
hear the Dhamma. The Blessed One taught me the Dhamma
with its higher and higher levels, with its more and more sub-
lime levels, with its dark and bright counterparts. As the Blessed
One taught the Dhamma to me in this way, through direct
knowledge of a certain teaching here in that Dhamma, I came to



-■:!


Vtmamsaka Sutta: Sutta 47


1


■■ ! 1 Hit


a conclusion about the teachings. I placed confidence in the
Teacher thus: "The Blessed One is fully enlightened, the
Dhamma is well proclaimed by the Blessed One, the Sangha is
practising the good way.'"

16. "Bhikkhus, when anyone's faith has been planted, rooted,
and established in the Tathagata through these reasons, terms,
and phrases, his faith is said to be supported by reasons, rooted
in vision, firm; 490 it is invincible by any recluse or brahmin or
god or Mara or Brahma or by anyone in the world. That is how,
bhikkhus, there is an investigation of the Tathagata in accor-
dance with the Dhamma, and that is how the Tathagata is well
investigated in accordance with the Dhamma."

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


I if nr



48 Kosambiya Sutta
The Kosambians


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at KosambI in Ghosita's Park.

2. Now on that occasion the bhikkhus at KosambI had taken to
quarrelling and brawling and were deep in disputes, stabbing
each other with verbal daggers. They could neither convince
each other nor be convinced by others; they could neither per-
suade each other nor be persuaded by others. 491

3. Then [321] a certain bhikkhu went to the Blessed One, and
after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and
informed him of what was happening.

4. Then the Blessed One addressed a certain bhikkhu thus:
"Come, bhikkhu, tell those bhikkhus in my name that the
Teacher calls them." - "Yes, venerable sir," he replied, and he
went to those bhikkhus and told them: "The Teacher calls the
venerable ones."

"Yes, friend," they replied, and they went to the Blessed One,
and after paying homage to him, they sat down at one side. The
Blessed One then asked them: "Bhikkhus, is it true that you
have taken to quarrelling and brawling and are deep in dis-
putes, stabbing each other with verbal daggers; that you can nei-
ther convince each other nor be convinced by others, that you
can neither persuade each other nor be persuaded by others?"

"Yes, venerable sir."

5. "Bhikkhus, what do you think? When you take to quar-
relling and brawling and are deep in disputes, stabbing each
other with verbal daggers, do you on that occasion maintain acts
of loving-kindness by body, speech, and mind in public and in
private towards your companions in the holy life?"

"No, venerable sir."


419


420 Kosambiya Sutta: Sutta 48


1322


"So, bhikkhus, when you take to quarrelling and brawling and
are deep in disputes, stabbing each other with verbal daggers, on
that occasion you do not maintain acts of loving-kindness by
body, speech, and mind in public and in private towards your
companions in the holy life. Misguided men, what can you pos-
sibly know, what can you see, that you take to quarrelling and
brawling and are deep in disputes, [322] stabbing each other
with verbal daggers? That you can neither convince each other
nor be convinced by others, that you can neither persuade each
other nor be persuaded by others? Misguided men, that will
lead to your harm and suffering for a long time,"

6. Then the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus:
"Bhikkhus, there are these six memorable qualities that create
love and respect and conduce to helpfulness, to non-dispute, to
concord, and to unity. What are the six?

"Here a bhikkhu maintains bodily acts of loving-kindness
both in public and in private towards his companions in the
holy life. This is a memorable quality that creates love and
respect, and conduces to helpfulness, to non-dispute, to con-
cord, and to unity.

"Again, a bhikkhu maintains verbal acts of loving-kindness
both in public and in private towards his companions in the
holy life. This is a memorable quality that creates love and
respect, and conduces to... unity.

"Again, a bhikkhu maintains mental acts of loving-kindness
both in public and in private towards his companions in the
holy life. This is a memorable quality that creates love and
respect, and conduces to., .unity.

"Again, a bhikkhu uses things in common with his virtuous
companions in the holy life; without making reservations, he
shares with them any gain of a kind that accords with the
Dhamma and has been obtained in a way that accords with the
Dhamma, including even the contents of his bowl. This is a
memorable quality that creates love and respect, and conduces
to... unity.

"Again, a bhikkhu dwells both in public and in private pos-
sessing in common with his companions in the holy life those
virtues that are unbroken, untorn, unblotched, unmottled, lib-
erating, commended by the wise, not misapprehended, and


The Kosambians 421


conducive to concentration. This too is a memorable quality that
creates love and respect, and conduces to. . .unity.

"Again, a bhikkhu dwells both in public and in private pos-
sessing in common with his companions in the holy life that
view that is noble and emancipating, and leads one who prac-
tises in accordance with it to the complete destruction of suffer-
ing. 492 This too is a memorable quality that creates love and
respect, and conduces to helpfulness, to non-dispute, to concord,
and to unity.

"These are the six memorable qualities that create love and
respect, and conduce to helpfulness, to non-dispute, to concord,
and to unity.

7. "Of these memorable qualities, the highest, the most com-
prehensive, the most conclusive is this view that is noble and
emancipating, and leads the one who practises in accordance
with it to the complete destruction of suffering. Just as the high-
est, the most comprehensive, the most conclusive part of a pin-
nacled building is the pinnacle itself, so too, [323] of these six
memorable qualities, the highest... is this view that is noble and
emancipating. . .

8. "And how does this view that is noble and emancipating
lead the one who practises in accordance with it to the complete
destruction of suffering?

"Here a bhikkhu, gone to the forest or to the root of a tree or
to an empty hut, considers thus: 'Is there any obsession unaban-
doned in myself that might so obsess my mind that I cannot
know or see things as they actually are?' If a bhikkhu is
obsessed by sensual lust, then his mind is obsessed. If he is
obsessed by ill will, then his mind is obsessed. If he is obsessed
by sloth and torpor, then his mind is obsessed. If he is obsessed
by restlessness and remorse, then his mind is obsessed. If he is
obsessed by doubt, then his mind is obsessed. If a bhikkhu is
absorbed in speculation about this world, then his mind is
obsessed. If a bhikkhu is absorbed in speculation about the other
world, then his mind is obsessed. If a bhikkhu takes to quar-
relling and brawling and is deep in disputes, stabbing others
with verbal daggers, then his mind is obsessed.

"He understands thus: 'There is no obsession unabandoned in
myself that might so obsess my mind that I cannot know and see


422 Kosambiya Sutta: Sutta 48


1324


things as they actually are. My mind is well disposed for awak-
ening to the truths.' 493 This is the first knowledge attained by him
that is noble, supramundane, not shared by ordinary people.

9. "Again, a noble disciple considers thus: 'When I pursue,
develop, and cultivate this view, do I obtain internal serenity, do
I personally obtain stillness?'

"He understands thus: 'When I pursue, develop, and cultivate
this view, I obtain internal serenity, I personally obtain stillness.'
This is the second knowledge attained by him that is noble,
supramundane, not shared by ordinary people.

10. "Again, a noble disciple considers thus: 'Is there any other
recluse or brahmin outside [the Buddha's Dispensation] pos-
sessed of a view such as I possess?'

"He understands thus: 'There is no other recluse or brahmin
outside [the Buddha's Dispensation] possessed of a view [324]
such as I possess.' This is the third knowledge attained by him
that is noble, supramundane, not shared by ordinary people.

11. "Again, a noble disciple considers thus: 'Do I possess the
character 494 of a person who possesses right view?' What is the
character of a person who possesses right view? This is the
character of a person who possesses right view: although he
may commit some kind of offence for which a means of reha-
bilitation has been laid down, 495 still he at once confesses,
reveals, and discloses it to the Teacher or to wise companions
in the holy life, and having done that, he enters upon restraint
for the future. Just as ( a young, tender infant lying prone at
once draws back when he puts his hand or his foot on a live
coal, so too, that is the character of a person who possesses
right view.

"He understands thus: 'I possess the character of a person
who possesses right view.' This is the fourth knowledge
attained by him that is noble, supramundane, not shared by
ordinary people.

12. "Again, a noble disciple considers thus: 'Do I possess the
character of a person who possesses right view?' What is the
character of a person who possesses right view? This is the char-
acter of a person who possesses right view: although he may be
active in various matters for his companions in the holy life, yet
he has a keen regard for training in the higher virtue, training in
the higher mind, and training in the higher wisdom. Just as a


The Kosambians 423


c0 w with a new calf, while she grazes watches her calf, so too,
(fiat is the character of a person who possesses right view.

"He understands thus: 'I possess the character of a person
who possesses right view/ This is the fifth knowledge attained
by him that is noble, supramundane, not shared by ordinary
people. [325]

13. "Again, a noble disciple considers thus: 'Do I possess the
strength 496 of a person who possesses right view?' What is the
strength of a person who possesses right view? This is the
strength of a person who possesses right view: when the
Dhamma and Discipline proclaimed by the Tathagata is being
taught, he heeds it, gives it attention, engages it with all his
mind, hears the Dhamma as with eager ears.

"He understands thus: 'I possess the strength of a person who
possesses right view.' This is the sixth knowledge attained by
him that is noble, supramundane, not shared by ordinary people.

14. "Again, a noble disciple considers thus: 'Do I possess the
strength of a person who possesses right view?' What is the
strength of a person who possesses right view? This is the
strength of a person who possesses right view: when the
Dhamma and Discipline proclaimed by the Tathagata is being
taught, he gains inspiration in the meaning, gains inspiration in
the Dhamma, gains gladness connected with the Dhamma. 497

"He understands thus: 'I possess the strength of a person who
possesses right view.' This is the seventh knowledge attained by
him that is noble, supramundane, not shared by ordinary people.

15. "When a noble disciple is thus possessed of seven factors,
he has well sought the character for realisation of the fruit of
stream-entry. When a noble disciple is thus possessed of seven
factors, he possesses the fruit of stream-entry." 498


That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.




49 Brahmanimantanika Sutta
The Invitation of a Brahma


[326] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One
was living at Savatthi in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." -
"Venerable sir," they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, on one occasion I was living at Ukkattha in the
Subhaga Grove at the root of a royal sala tree. 499 Now on that
occasion a pernicious view had arisen in Baka the Brahma thus:
'This is permanent, this is everlasting, this is eternal, this is total,
this is not subject to pass away; for this neither is born nor ages
nor dies nor passes away nor reappears, and beyond this there
is no escape.' 500

3. "I knew with my mind the thought in the mind of Baka the
Brahma, so just as quickly as a strong man might extend his
flexed arm or flex his extended arm, I vanished from the root of
the royal sala tree in the Subhaga Grove at Ukkattha and
appeared in that Brahma-world. Baka the Brahma saw me com-
ing in the distance and said: 'Come, good sir! Welcome, good
sir! It is long, good sir, since you found an opportunity to come
here. Now, good sir, this is permanent, this is everlasting, this is
eternal, this is total, this is not subject to pass away; for this nei-
ther is born nor ages nor dies nor passes away nor reappears,
and beyond this there is no escape.'

4. "When this was said, I told Baka the Brahma: 'The worthy
Baka the Brahma has lapsed into ignorance; he has lapsed into
ignorance in that he says of the impermanent that it is perma-
nent, of the transient that it is everlasting, of the non-eternal that
it is eternal, of the incomplete that it is total, of what is subject to
pass away that it is not subject to pass away, of what is born,
ages, dies, passes away, and reappears, that it neither is born
nor ages nor dies nor passes away nor reappears; and when


424


f-327


The Invitation of a Brahma 425


(here is an escape beyond this, he says that there is no escape
beyond this.'

5 . "Then Mara the Evil One took possession of a member of
(he Brahma's Assembly , 501 and he told me: 'Bhikkhu, bhikkhu,
do not disbelieve him, do not disbelieve him; for this Brahma is
the Great Brahma, [327] the Overlord, the Untranscended, of
Infallible Vision, Wielder of Mastery, Lord Maker and Creator,
Most High Providence, Master and Father of those that are and
ever can be. Before your time, bhikkhu, there were recluses and
brahmins in the world who condemned earth through disgust
with earth , 502 who condemned water through disgust with
water, who condemned fire through disgust with fire, who con-
demned air through disgust with air, who condemned beings
through disgust with beings, who condemned gods through dis-
gust with gods, who condemned Pajapati through disgust with
Pajapati, who condemned Brahma through disgust with
Brahma; and on the dissolution of the body, when their life was
cut off, they became established in an inferior body . 503 Before
your time, bhikkhu, there were also recluses and brahmins in
the world who lauded earth through delight in earth , 504 who
lauded water through delight in water, who lauded fire through
delight in fire, who lauded air through delight in air, who lauded
beings through delight in beings, who lauded gods through
delight in gods, who lauded Pajapati through delight in
Pajapati, who lauded Brahma through delight in Brahma; and
on the dissolution of the body, when their life was cut off, they
became established in a superior body . 505 So, bhikkhu, I tell you
this: Be sure, good sir, to do only as the Brahma says; never
overstep the word of the Brahma. If you overstep the word of
the Brahma, bhikkhu, then, like a man trying to deflect an
approaching beam of light with a stick, or like a man losing his
hold on the earth with his hands and feet as he slips into a deep
chasm, so it will befall you, bhikkhu. Be sure, good sir, to do
only as the Brahma says; never overstep the word of the
Brahma. Do you not see the Brahma's Assembly seated here,
bhikkhu?' And Mara the Evil One thus called to witness the
Brahma's Assembly . 506

6 . "When this was said, I told Mara the Evil One: 'I know you.
Evil One. Do not think: "He does not know me." You are Mara,
Evil One, and the Brahma and the Brahma's Assembly and the


426 Brahmanimantanika Suite: Suite 49


i 328


members of the Brahma's Assembly have all fallen into your
hands, they have all fallen into your power. You, Evil One,
think: "This one too has fallen into my hands, he too has fallen
into my power"; but I have not fallen into your hands. Evil One,
I have not fallen into your power.'

7. "When this was said, Baka the Brahma told me: 'Good sir, I
say of the permanent that it is permanent, [328] of the everlast-
ing that it is everlasting, of the eternal that it is eternal, of the
total that it is total, of what is not subject to pass away that it is
not subject to pass away, of what neither is born nor ages nor
dies nor passes away nor reappears that it neither is born nor
ages nor dies nor passes away nor reappears; and when there is
no escape beyond this, I say that there is no escape beyond this.
Before your time, bhikkhu, there were recluses and brahmins in
the world whose asceticism lasted as long as your whole life.
They knew, when there is an escape beyond, that there is an
escape beyond, and when there is no escape beyond, that there
is no escape beyond. So, bhikkhu, I tell you this: You will find
no escape beyond, and eventually you will reap only weariness
and disappointment. If you will hold to earth, you will be close
to me, within my domain, for me to work my will upon and
punish. 507 If you hold to water... to fire... to air... to beings... to
gods... to Pajapati...to Brahma, you will be close to me, within
my domain, for me to work my will upon and punish/

8. "'I know that too, Brahma. If I will hold to earth, I shall be
close to you, within your domain, for you to work your will
upon and punish. If I will hold to water. ..to fire. ..to air. ..to
beings... to gods... to Pajapati...to Brahma, I shall be close to
you, within your domain, for you to work your will upon and
punish. Further, I understand your reach and your sway to
extend thus: Baka the Brahma has this much power, this much
might, this much influence.'

'"Now, good sir, how far do you understand my reach and
my sway to extend?'

9. '"As far as moon and sun revolve
Shining and lighting up the quarters.

Over a thousandfold such world
Does your sovereignty extend.


i329


The Invitation of a Brahma 427


And there you know the high and low,

And those with lust and free from lust.

The state that is thus and otherwise.

The coming and going of beings.

Brahma, I understand your reach and your sway to extend thus:
Baka the Brahma has this much power, this much might, [329]
this much influence. 308

10. "'But, Brahma, there are three other bodies, which you nei-
ther know nor see, and which I know and see. There is the body
called [the gods of] Streaming Radiance, from which you passed
away and reappeared here. 509 Because you have dwelt here
long, your memory of that has lapsed, and hence you do not
know or see it, but I know and see it. Thus, Brahma, in regard to
direct knowledge I do not stand merely at the same level as you,
how then could I know less? Rather, I know more than you. 510

"'There is the body called [the gods of] Refulgent Glory...
There is the body called [the gods of] Great Fruit. You do not
know or see that, but I know and see it. Thus, Brahma, in regard
to direct knowledge I do not stand merely at the same level as
you, how then could I know less? Rather, I know more than you.

11. "'Brahma, having directly known earth as earth, and having
directly known that which is not commensurate with the earth-
ness of earth, I did not claim to be earth, I did not claim to be in
earth, I did not claim to be apart from earth, I did not claim earth
to be "mine," I did not affirm earth. 511 Thus, Brahma, in regard
to direct knowledge I do not stand merely at the same level as
you, how then could I know less? Rather, I know more than you.

12-23. "'Brahma, having directly known water as water... fire
as fire. ..air as air. ..beings as beings. ..gods as gods...Pajapati as
Pajapati... Brahma as Brahma... the gods of Streaming Radiance
as the gods of Streaming Radiance. . .the gods of Refulgent Glory
as the gods of Refulgent Glory... the gods of Great Fruit as the
gods of Great Fruit. ..the Overlord as the Overlord... all as all,
and having directly known that which is not commensurate
with the allness of all, I did not claim to be all, I did not claim to
be in all, I did not claim to be apart from all, I did not claim all to
be "mine," I did not affirm all. Thus, Brahma, in regard to direct
knowledge, Ido not stand merely at the same level as yoxi, how
then could I know less? Rather, I know more than you.'


428 Bmhmanimantanika Sutta: Sutta 49


i 330


24. "'Good sir, [if you claim to directly know] that which is not
commensurate with the allness of all, may your claim not turn
out to be vain and empty!' 512

25. "'The consciousness that makes no showing,

Nor has to do with finiteness.

Not claiming being with respect to all: 513

that is not commensurate with the earthness of earth, that is not
commensurate with the watemess of water... [330]... that is not
commensurate with the allness of all.'

26. "'Good sir, I shall vanish from you.'

"'Vanish from me if you can, Brahma.'

"Then Baka the Brahma, saying: 'I shall vanish from the recluse
Gotama, I shall vanish from the recluse Gotama/ was unable to
vanish. Thereupon I said: 'Brahma, I shall vanish from you.'

"'Vanish from me if you can, good sir.'

"Then I performed such a feat of supernormal power that the
Brahma and the Brahma's Assembly and the members of the
Brahma's Assembly could hear my voice but could not see me.
After 1 had vanished, I uttered this stanza:

27. "'Having seen fear in every mode of being

And in being seeking for non-being,

I did not affirm any mode of being,

Nor did I cling to any delight [in being].' 514
*

28. "At that the Brahma and the Brahma's Assembly and the
members of the Brahma's Assembly were struck with wonder
and amazement, saying: 'It is wonderful, sirs, it is marvellous,
the great power and great might of the recluse Gotama! We
have never before seen or heard of any other recluse or brahmin
who had such great power and such great might as has this
recluse Gotama, who went forth from a Sakyan clan. Sirs,
though living in a generation that delights in being, that takes
delight in being, that rejoices in being, he has extirpated being
together with its root.'

29. "Then Mara the Evil One took possession of a member of
the Brahma's Assembly, and he said to me: 'Good sir, if that is
what you know, if that is what you have discovered, do not


The Invitation of a Brahma 429


guide your [lay] disciples or those gone forth, do not teach the
Ohamxna to your [lay] disciples or to those gone forth, create no
yearning in your [lay] disciples or in those gone forth. Before
your time, bhikkhu, there were recluses and brahmins in the
world claiming to be accomplished and fully enlightened, and
they guided their [lay] disciples and those gone forth; they
taught the Dhamma to their [lay] disciples and to those gone
forth; they created yearning in their [lay] disciples and in those
gone forth; and on the dissolution of the body, when their life
was cut off, they became established in an inferior body. Before
your time, bhikkhu, there were also recluses and brahmins in
the world claiming to be accomplished and fully enlightened,
[331] and they did not guide their [lay] disciples or those gone
forth; they did not teach the Dhamma to their [lay] disciples or
to those gone forth; they created no yearning in their [lay] disci-
ples or in those gone forth; and on the dissolution of the body,
when their life was cut off, they became established in a superior
body. So, bhikkhu, I tell you this: Be sure, good sir, to abide
inactive, devoted to a pleasant abiding here and now; this is bet-
ter left undeclared, and so, good sir, inform no one else/ 515
30. "When this was said, I told Mara the Evil One: 'I know
you. Evil One. Do not think: "He does not know me." You are
Mara, Evil One. It is not out of compassion for their welfare that
you speak thus, it is without compassion for their welfare that
you speak thus. You think thus. Evil One: "Those to whom the
recluse Gotama teaches the Dhamma will escape from my
sphere." Those recluses and brahmins of yours. Evil One, who
claimed to be accomplished and fully enlightened, were not
accomplished and fully enlightened. But I, who claim to be
accomplished and fully enlightened, am accomplished and fully
enlightened. If the Tathagata teaches the Dhamma to disciples
he is such. Evil One, and if the Tathagata does not teach the
Dhamma to disciples he is such. 516 If the Tathagata guides disci-
ples he is such. Evil One, and if the Tathagata does not guide
disciples he is such. Why is that? Because the Tathagata has
abandoned the taints that defile, bring renewal of being, give
trouble, ripen in suffering, and lead to future birth, ageing, and
death; he has cut them off at the root, made them like a palm
stump, done away with them so that they are no lobger subject
to future arising. Just as a palm tree whose crown is cut off is




■


430 Bfahmanimantanika Sutta: Sutta 49


i 330


incapable of further growth, so too, the Tathagata has aban-
doned the taints that defile. . .cut them off at the root, made them
like a palm stump, done away with them so that they are no
longer subject to future arising/"

31. Thus, because Mara was unable to reply, and because [it
began] with the Brahma's invitation, this discourse is entitled
"On the Invitation of a Brahma."


1




50 Maratajjaniya Sutta
The Rebuke to Mara


[332] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the venerable Maha
Moggallana was living in the Bhagga country at Sumsumaragira
in the Bhesakala Grove, the Deer Park.

2. Now on that occasion the venerable Maha Moggallana was
walking up and down in the open. And on that occasion Mara
the Evil One went into the venerable Maha Moggallana 's belly
and entered his bowels. Then the venerable Maha Moggallana
considered thus: "Why is my belly so heavy? One would think it
full of beans." Thus he left the walk and went into his dwelling,
where he sat down on a seat made ready.

3. When he had sat down, he gave thorough attention to him-
self, and he saw that Mara the Evil One had gone into his belly
and had entered his bowels. When he saw this, he said: "Come
out. Evil One! Come out. Evil One! Do not harass the Tathagata,
do not harass the Tathagata's disciple, or it will lead to your
harm and suffering for a long time."

4. Then Mara the Evil One thought: "This recluse does not
know me, he does not see me when he says that. Even his
teacher would not know me so soon, so how can this disciple
know me?"

5. Then the venerable Maha Moggallana said: "Even thus I
know you, Evil One. Do not think: 'He does not know me.' You
are Mara, Evil One. You were thinking thus. Evil One: 'This
recluse does not know me, he does not see me when he says
that. Even his teacher would not know me so soon, so how can
this disciple know me?"'

6. Then Mara the Evil One thought: "The recluse knew me, he
saw me when he said that," whereupon he [333] came up from
the venerable Maha Moggallana's mouth and stbod against the
door bar.


431


432 Maratajjaniya Sutta: Sutta 50


i 334


7. The venerable Maha Moggallana saw him standing there
and said: "I see you there too. Evil One. Do not think: 'He does
not see me/ You are standing against the door bar. Evil One.

8. "It happened once. Evil One, that I was a Mara named
DusI, 517 and I had a sister named Kali. You were her son, so you
were my nephew.

9. "Now on that occasion the Blessed One Kakusandha,
accomplished and fully enlightened, had appeared in the
world. 518 The Blessed One Kakusandha, accomplished and fully
enlightened, had an auspicious pair of chief disciples named
Vidhura and Sanjlva. Among all the disciples of the Blessed One
Kakusandha, accomplished and fully enlightened, there was
none equal to the venerable Vidhura in teaching the Dhamma.
That was how the venerable Vidhura came to have the designa-
tion 'Vidhura.' 519 But the venerable Sanjlva, gone to the forest or
to the root of a tree or to an empty hut, entered without difficulty
upon the cessation of perception and feeling.

10. "It happened once. Evil One, that the venerable Sanjlva
had seated himself at the root of a certain tree and entered upon
the cessation of perception and feeling. Some cowherds, shep-
herds, and ploughmen passing by saw the venerable Sanjlva sit-
ting at the root of the tree having entered upon the cessation of
perception and feeling, and they thought: 'It is wonderful, sirs, it
is marvellous! There is this recluse sitting here dead. Let us cre-
mate him.' Then the cowherds, shepherds, and ploughmen col-
lected grass, wood, and cowdung, and having piled it up
against the venerable Sapjlva's body, they set fire to it and went
on their way.

11. "Now, Evil One, when the night had ended, the venerable
Sanjlva emerged from the attainment. 520 He shook his robe, and
then, it being morning, he dressed, and taking his bowl and
outer robe, he went into the village for alms. The cowherds,
shepherds, and ploughmen passing by saw the venerable
Sanjlva wandering for alms, and they thought: 'It is wonderful,
sirs, it is marvellous! This recluse who was sitting there dead
has come back to life!' [334] That was how the venerable Sanjlva
came to have the designation 'Sanjlva.' 521

12. "Then, Evil One, the Mara DusI considered thus: 'There are
these virtuous bhikkhus of good character, but I do not know
their coming or their going. Let me now take possession of the


The Rebuke to Mara 433


brahmin householders, telling them: "Come now, abuse, revile,
scold, and harass the virtuous bhikkhus of good character; then
perhaps, when they are abused, reviled, scolded, and harassed
by you, some change will come about in their minds whereby
the Mara Dusi may find an opportunity."' 522

13. "Then, Evil One, the Mara Dusi took possession of those
brahmin householders, telling them: 'Come now, abuse, revile,
scold, and harass the virtuous bhikkhus of good character; then
perhaps, when they are abused, reviled, scolded, and harassed
by you, some change will come about in their minds whereby
the Mara DusT may find an opportunity.' Then, when the Mara
Dusi had taken possession of the brahmin householders, they
abused, reviled, scolded, and harassed the virtuous bhikkhus of
good character thus: 523 'These bald-pated recluses, these
swarthy menial offspring of the Kinsman's feet, 524 claim: "We
are meditators, we are meditators!" and with shoulders droop-
ing, heads down and all limp, they meditate, premeditate, out-
meditate, and mismeditate. 525 Just as an owl on a branch waiting
for a mouse meditates, premeditates, out-meditates, and
mismeditates, or just as a jackal on a river-bank waiting for fish
meditates, premeditates, out-meditates, and mismeditates, or
just as a cat by a door-post or a dust-bin or a drain, waiting for a
mouse, meditates, premeditates, out-meditates, and mismedi-
tates, or just as a donkey unladen, standing by a door-post or a
dust-bin or a drain, meditates, premeditates, out-meditates, and
mismeditates, so too, these bald-pated recluses, these swarthy
menial offspring of the Kinsman's feet, claim: "We are medita-
tors, we are meditators!" and with shoulders drooping, heads
down and all limp, they meditate, premeditate, out-meditate,
and mismeditate.' Now, Evil One, on that occasion most of those
human beings, when they died, reappeared on the dissolution of
the body, after death, in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy
destination, in perdition, even in hell. [335]

14. "Then the Blessed One Kakusandha, accomplished and
fully enlightened, addressed the bhikkhus thus: 'Bhikkhus, the
Mara Dusi has taken possession of the brahmin householders,
telling them: "Come now, abuse, revile, scoldy and harass the
virtuous bhikkhus of good character; then perhaps, when they
are abused, reviled, scolded, and harassed by you, some change
will come about in their mind whereby the Mara Dusi may find



434 Maratajjaniya S utta: Sutta 50


1336



an opportunity." Come, bhikkhus, abide pervading one quar-
ter with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, likewise the sec-
ond, likewise the third, likewise the fourth; so above, below,
around, and everywhere, and to all as to yourselves, abide per-
vading the all-encompassing world with a mind imbued with
loving-kindness, abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without
hostility and without ill will. Abide pervading one quarter
with a mind imbued with compassion... with a mind imbued
with appreciative joy... with a mind imbued with equanimity...
abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without hostility and with-
out ill will/ 526


15. "So, Evil One, when those bhikkhus had been thus advised
and instructed by the Blessed One Kakusandha, accomplished
and fully enlightened, then, gone to the forest or to the root of a
tree or to an empty hut, they abided pervading one quarter with
a mind imbued with loving-kindness... with a mind imbued
with compassion... with a mind imbued with appreciative
joy... with a mind imbued with equanimity... without hostility
and without ill will.

16. "Then, Evil One, the Mara DusI considered thus: 'Though I
do as I am doing, still I do not know the coming or the going of
these virtuous bhikkhus of good character. Let me now take
possession of the brahmin householders, telling them: "Come
now, honour, respect, revere, and venerate the virtuous
bhikkhus of good character; [336] then perhaps, when they are
honoured, respected, revered, and venerated by you, some
change will come about in their minds whereby the Mara DusI
may find an opportunity.'" 527

17. "Then, Evil One, the Mara DusI took possession of those
brahmin householders, telling them: 'Come now, honour,
respect, revere, and venerate the virtuous bhikkhus of good
character; then perhaps, when they are honoured, respected,
revered, and venerated by you, some change will come about in
their minds whereby the Mara DusI may find an opportunity.'
Then, when the Mara DusI had taken possession of the brahmin
householders, they honoured, respected, revered, and venerated
the virtuous bhikkhus of good character. Now, Evil One, on that
occasion most of those human beings, when they died, reap-
peared on the dissolution of the body, after death, in a happy
destination, even the heavenly world.


The Rebuke to Mara 435


18. "Then, Evil One, the Blessed One Kakusandha, accom-
plished and fully enlightened, addressed the bhikkhus thus:
'Bhikkhus, the Mara DusI has taken possession of those brahmin
householders, telling them: "Come now, honour, respect, revere,
and venerate the virtuous bhikkhus of good character; then per-
haps, when they are honoured, respected, revered, and venerated
hy you, some change will come about in their minds whereby
the Mara Dust may find an opportunity." Come, bhikkhus,
abide contemplating foulness in the body, perceiving repulsive-
ness in nutriment, perceiving disenchantment with all the
world, contemplating impermanence in all formations.' 528

19. "So, Evil One, when those bhikkhus had been thus
addressed and instructed by the Blessed One Kakusandha,
accomplished and fully enlightened, then, gone to the forest or
to the root of a tree or to an empty hut, they abided contemplat-
ing foulness in the body, perceiving repulsiveness in nutriment,
perceiving disenchantment with all the world, contemplating
impermanence in all formations.

20. "Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One
Kakusandha, accomplished and fully enlightened, dressed, and
taking his bowl and outer robe, he went into the village for alms
with the venerable Vidhura as his attendant.

21. "Then the Mara DusI took possession of a certain boy, and
picking up a stone, he struck the venerable Vidhura on the head
with it and cut his head. With blood running from his cut head,
[337] the venerable Vidhura followed close behind the Blessed
One Kakusandha, accomplished and fully enlightened. Then the
Blessed One Kakusandha, accomplished and fully enlightened,
turned around and looked at him with the elephant look: 'This
Mara DusI knows no bounds.' And with that look. Evil One, the
Mara DQsI fell from that place and reappeared in the Great Hell. 529

22. "Now, Evil One, there are three names for the Great Hell:
the hell of the six bases for contact, the hell of, the impalement
with stakes, and the hell to be felt for oneself. 530 Then, Evil One,
the wardens of hell came up to me and said: 'Gopd sir, when
stake meets stake in your heart, then you will know: "I have
been roasting in hell for a thousand years.'"

23. "For many a year. Evil One, for many a century, for many
a millennium, I roasted in that Great Hell. For ten millennia I
roasted in the auxiliary of that Great Hell, experiencing the


436 Maratajjamya Sutta: Sutta 50 i 337


feeling called that of emergence from ripening. 531 My body had
the same form as a human body. Evil One, but my head had the
form of a fish's head.

24. "What can hell be well compared to
Wherein DusI roasted, assailant
Of Vidhura the disciple
And the brahmin Kakusandha? 532
Stakes of steel, even a hundred.

Each one suffered separately;

These can hell be well compared to
Wherein DusI roasted, assailant
Of Vidhura the disciple
And the brahmin Kakusandha.

Dark One, you have much to suffer
By assaulting such a bhikkhu.

An Enlightened One's disciple
Who directly knows this fact.

25. "In the middle of the ocean
There are mansions aeon-lasting.

Sapphire-shining, fiery-gleaming |

With a clear translucent lustre,

Where iridescent sea-nymphs dance
In complex, intricate rhythms.

»

Dark One, you have much to suffer. . .

Who directly knows this fact.

26. "I am one who, when exhorted
By the Enlightened One in person.

Shook Migara's Mother's Palace
With his toe, the Order watching. 533

Dark One, you have much to suffer. . .

Who directly knows this fact.


27. "I am one who, wielding firmly
Strength of supernormal powers.


The Rebuke to Mara 437


f 1338

Shook all Vejayanta Palace
With his toe to incite the gods: 534 [338]

Dark One, you have much to suffer. . .
Who directly knows this fact.

28. "I am one who, in that palace.

Posed to Sakka this question:

'Do you know then, friend, deliverance
Due to craving's full destruction?'
Whereupon Sakka then answered
Truly to the question asked him: 535

Dark One, you have much to suffer...
Who directly knows this fact.

29. "I am one who thought of posing
Brahma this question

In Sudhamma Hall in heaven:

'Is there still found in you, friend.

The wrong view you once accepted?

Is the radiance of heaven
Clearly seen by you as passing?'
Brahma then answered my question
Truthfully and in due sequence:

'There is found in me no longer.

Sir, the wrong view that once I held;

All the radiance of heaven
I now clearly see as passing;

I disclaim my prior claim
That it is permanent, eternal': 536

Dark One, you have much to suffer. . .
Who directly knows this fact.

30. "I am one who, by liberation.

Has touched the peak of Mount Sineru,
Visited India and Pubbavideha
And all the regions of the earth. 537


438 Maratajjaniya Sutta: Sutta 50


i 338


Dark One, you have much to suffer
By assaulting such a bhikkhu,

An Enlightened One's disciple
Who directly knows this fact.

31. "There has never been found a fire
Which intends, 'Let me bum the fool,'
But a fool who assaults a fire
Burns himself by his own doing.

So it is with you, O Mara:

By assaulting the Tathagata,

Like a fool who plays with fire
You only burn yourself alone.

By assaulting the Tathagata,

You generate much demerit.

Evil One, do you imagine
That your evil will not ripen?

Doing thus, you store up evil
Which will last long, O End-maker!
Mara, shun the Enlightened One,

Play no more your tricks on bhikkhus."

So the bhikkhu chastened Mara
In the Bhesakala thicket
Whereupon the sombre spirit
Disappeared right then and there.


Part Two

The Middle Fifty Discourses

(MajjhimapannasapaU)



1

The Division on Householders

( Gahapativagga )




51 Kandaraka Sutta
To Kandaraka


[339] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One
was living at Campa on the banks of the Gaggara Lake with a
large Sangha of bhikkhus. Then Pessa, the elephant driver's son,
and Kandaraka the wanderer went to the Blessed One. Pessa,
after paying homage to the Blessed One, sat down at one side,
while Kandaraka exchanged greetings with the Blessed One,
and when this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he
stood at one side. 538 Standing there, he surveyed the Sangha of
bhikkhus sitting in complete silence, 539 and then he said to the
Blessed One:

2. "It is wonderful. Master Gotama, it is marvellous how the
Sangha of bhikkhus has been led to practise the right way by
Master Gotama. Those who were Blessed Ones, accomplished
and fully enlightened in the past, at most only led the Sangha of
bhikkhus to practise the right way as is done by Master Gotama
now. And those who will be Blessed Ones, accomplished and
fully enlightened in the future, at most will only lead the Sangha
of bhikkhus to practise the right way as is done by Master
Gotama now." 540

3. "So it is, Kandaraka, so it is! Those who were Blessed Ones,
accomplished and fully enlightened in the past, at most only led
the Sangha of bhikkhus to practise the right way as is done by
me now. And those who will be Blessed Ones, accomplished and
fully enlightened in the future, at most will only lead the Sangha
of bhikkhus to practise the right way as is done by me now.

"Kandaraka, in this Sangha of bhikkhus there are bhikkhus
who are arahants with taints destroyed, who have lived the
holy life, done what had to be done, laid down the burden,
reached the true goal, destroyed the fetters of being, and who
are completely liberated through final knowledge. In this


443


444 Kandamka Sutta: Sutta 51


i 340


Sangha of bhikkhus there are bhikkhus in higher training, of
constant virtue, living a life of constant virtue, sagacious, living
a life of constant sagacity. They abide with their minds well
established in the four foundations of mindfulness. 541 What
four? Here, Kandaraka, [340] a bhikkhu abides contemplating
the body as a body, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having
put away covetousness and grief for the world. He abides con-
templating feelings as feelings, ardent, fully aware, and mind-
ful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world. He
abides contemplating mind as mind, ardent, fully aware, and
mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
He abides contemplating mind-objects as mind-objects, ardent,
fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and
grief for the world."

4. When this was said, Pessa, the elephant driver's son, said:
"It is wonderful, venerable sir, it is marvellous how well the
four foundations of mindfulness have been made known by the
Blessed One: for the purification of beings, for the surmounting
of sorrow and lamentation, for the disappearance of pain and
grief, for the attainment of the true way, for the realisation of
Nibbana. From time to time, venerable sir, we white-clothed lay
people also abide with our minds well established in these four
foundations of mindfulness. 542 Here, venerable sir, we abide
contemplating the body as a body... feelings as feelings... mind
as mind... mind-objects as mind-objects, ardent, fully aware, and
mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world.
It is wonderful, venerable sir, it is marvellous how amid man's
tangle, corruption, and deceptions, the Blessed One knows the
welfare and harm of beings. For humankind is a tangle but the
animal is open enough. Venerable sir, I can drive an elephant to
be tamed, and in the time it takes to make a trip back and forth
in Campa, that elephant will show every kind of deception,
duplicity, crookedness, and fraud [he is capable of]. 543 But those
who are called our slaves, messengers, and servants behave in
one way with the body, in another way by speech, while their
minds work in still another way. It is wonderful, venerable sir, it
is marvellous how amid man's tangle, corruption, and decep-
tions, the Blessed One knows the welfare and harm of beings.
For humankind is a tangle but the animal is open enough."


To Kandaraka 445


i 342

5. "So it is, Pessa, so it is! [341] Humankind is a tangle but the
animal is open enough. Pessa, there are four kinds of persons to
be found existing in the world. 544 What four? Here a certain
kind of person torments himself and pursues the practice of tor-
turing himself. Here a certain kind of person torments others
and pursues the practice of torturing others. Here a certain kind
of person torments himself and pursues the practice of tortur-
ing himself, and he also torments others and pursues the prac-
tice of torturing others. Here a certain kind of person does not
torment himself or pursue the practice of torturing himself, and
he does not torment others or pursue the practice of torturing
others. Since he torments neither himself nor others, he is here
and now hungerless, extinguished, and cooled, and he abides
experiencing bliss, having himself become holy. 545 Which of
these four kinds of persons satisfies your mind, Pessa?"

"The first three do not satisfy my mind, venerable sir, but the
last one satisfies my mind."

6. "But, Pessa, why don't the first three kinds of persons satis-
fy your mind?"

"Venerable sir, the kind of person who torments himself and
pursues the practice? of torturing himself, torments and tortures
himself though he desires pleasure and recoils from pain; that is
why this kind of person does not satisfy my mind. And the kind
of person who torments others and pursues the practice of tor-
turing others, torments and tortures others who desire pleasure
and recoil from pain; that is why this kind of person does not
satisfy my mind. And the kind of person who torments himself
and pursues the practice of torturing himself, and who also
torments others and pursues the practice of torturing others, tor-
ments and tortures himself and others, both of whom desire
pleasure and recoil from pain; that is why this kind of person
does not satisfy my mind. [342] But the kind of person who does
not torment himself or pursue the practice of torturing himself
and who does not torment others or pursue the practice of tor-
turing others; who, since he torments neither himself nor others,
is here and now hungerless, extinguished, and cooled, and
abides experiencing bliss, having himself become holy - he does
not torment and torture either himself or others, both of whom
desire pleasure and recoil from pain. That is why this kind of


446 Kandaraka Sutta: Sutta 51


i343


person satisfies my mind. And now, venerable sir, we depart
We are busy and have much to do."

"Now is the time, Pessa, to do as you think fit."

Then Pessa, the elephant driver's son, having delighted and
rejoiced in the Blessed One's words, rose from his seat, and after
paying homage to the Blessed One, keeping him on his right, he
departed.

7. Soon after he had left, the Blessed One addressed the
bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus, Pessa, the elephant driver's son, i s
wise, he has great wisdom. If he had sat a while longer until I
had expounded for him in detail these four kinds of persons, he
would have greatly benefited. Still he has already greatly bene-
fited even as it is." 546

"This is the time. Blessed One, this is the time. Sublime One,
for the Blessed One to expound in detail these four kinds of per-
sons. Having heard it from the Blessed One, the bhikkhus will
remember it."

"Then, bhikkhus, listen and attend closely to what I shall say."

"Yes, venerable sir," the bhikkhus replied. The Blessed One
said this:

8. "Bhikkhus, what kind of person torments himself and pur-
sues the practice of torturing himself? 547 Here a certain person
goes naked, rejecting conventions, licking his hands, not coming
when asked, not stopping when asked; he does not accept food
brought or food specially made or an invitation to a meal; he
receives nothing from a pot, from a bowl, across a threshold,
across a stick, across a pestle, from two eating together, from a
pregnant woman, from a woman giving suck, from a woman
lying with a man, from where food is advertised to be distrib-
uted, from where a dog is waiting, from where flies are buzzing;
he accepts no fish or meat, he drinks no liquor, wine, or ferment-
ed brew. He keeps to one house, to one morsel; he keeps to two
houses to two morsels;... he keeps to seven houses, to seven
morsels. He lives on one saucerful a day, on two saucerfuls a
day... on seven saucerfuls a day. He takes food once a day, [343]
once every two days... once every seven days, and so on up to
once every fortnight; he dwells pursuing the practice of taking
food at stated intervals. He is an eater of greens or millet or wild
rice or hide-parings or moss or ricebran or rice-scum or sesanum 1
flour or grass or cowdung. He lives on forest roots and fruits, he


i 344


To Kandaraka 447


feeds on fallen fruits. He clothes himself in hemp, in hemp-
mixed cloth, in shrouds, in refuse rags, in tree bark, in antelope
bide, in strips of antelope hide, in kusa-grass fabric, in bark fab-
ric, in wood-shavings fabric, in head-hair wool, in animal wool,
fn owls' wings. He is one who pulls out hair and beard, pursuing
the practice of pulling out hair and beard. He is one who stands
continuously, rejecting seats. He is one who squats continuously,
devoted to maintaining the squatting position. He is one who
uses a mattress of spikes; he makes a mattress of spikes his bed.
He dwells pursuing the practice of bathing in water three times
daily including the evening. Thus in such a variety of ways he
dwells pursuing the practice of tormenting and mortifying the
body. This is called the kind of person who torments himself and
pursues the practice of torturing himself.

9. "What kind of person, bhikkhus, torments others and pur-
sues the practice of torturing others? Here a certain person is a
butcher of sheep, a butcher of pigs, a fowler, a trapper of wild
beasts, a hunter, a fisherman, a thief, an executioner, a prison
warden, or one who follows any other such bloody occupation.
This is called the kind of person who torments others and pur-
sues the practice of torturing others.

10. "What kind of person, bhikkhus, torments himself and
pursues the practice of torturing himself and also torments oth-
ers and pursues the practice of torturing others? Here some per-
son is a head-anointed noble king or a well-to-do brahmin. 548
Having had a new sacrificial temple built to the east of the city,
and having shaved off his hair and beard, dressed himself in
rough hide, and greased his body with ghee and oil, scratching
his back with a deer's horn, he enters the sacrificial temple
together with his chief queen and his brahmin high priest. There
he lies down on the bare ground with the grass on it. The king
lives on the milk in the first teat of a cow with a calf of the same
colour [344] while the chief queen lives on the milk in the sec-
ond teat and the brahmin high priest lives on the milk in the
third teat; the milk in the fourth teat they pour onto the fire,
and the calf lives on what is left. He says thus: 'Let so many
bulls be slaughtered for sacrifice, let so many bullocks be
slaughtered for sacrifice, let so many heifers be slaughtered for
sacrifice, let so many goats be slaughtered for sacrifice, let so
many sheep be slaughtered for sacrifice, let so many trees be


448 Kandaraka Sutta: Sutta 51


i345


felled for the sacrificial posts, let so much grass be cut for the
sacrificial grass.' And then his slaves, messengers, and servants
make preparations, weeping with tearful faces, being spurred
on by threats of punishment and by fear. This is called the kind
of person who torments himself and pursues the practice of tor-
turing himself and who torments others and pursues the prac-
tice of torturing others.

11. "What kind of person, bhikkhus, does not torment himself
or pursue the practice of torturing himself and does not torment
others or pursue the practice of tormenting others - the one who,
since he torments neither himself nor others, is here and now
hungerless, extinguished, and cooled, and abides experiencing
bliss, having himself become holy? 549

12. "Here, bhikkhus, a Tathagata appears in the world, accom-
plished, fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge and con-
duct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of persons
to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened, blessed.
He declares this world with its gods, its Maras, and its
Brahmas, this generation with its recluses and brahmins, its
princes and its people, which he has himself realised by direct
knowledge. He teaches the Dhamma good in the beginning,
good in the middle, and good in the end, with the right mean-
ing and phrasing, and he reveals a holy life that is utterly per-
fect and pure.

13. "A householder or householder's son or one born in some
other clan hears that Dhamma. On hearing the Dhamma he
acquires faith in the Tathagata. Possessing that faith, he consid-
ers thus: 'Household life is crowded and dusty; life gone forth
is wide open. It is not easy, while living in a home, to lead the
holy life utterly perfect and pure as a polished shell. Suppose I
shave off my hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go
forth from the home life into homelessness.' On a later occa-
sion, abandoning a small or a large fortune, [345] abandoning a
small or a large circle of relatives, he shaves off his hair and
beard, puts on the yellow robe, and goes forth from the home
life into homelessness.

14. "Having thus gone forth and possessing the bhikkhus
training and way of life, abandoning the killing of living beingS/
he abstains from killing living beings; with rod and weapon laid


i 346


To Kandaraka 449


aside, gentle and kindly, he abides compassionate to all living
beings. Abandoning the taking of what is not given, he abstains
from taking what is not given; taking only what is given, expect-
ing only what is given, by not stealing he abides in purity.
Abandoning incelibacy, he observes celibacy, living apart,
abstaining from the vulgar practice of sexual intercourse.

"Abandoning false speech, he abstains from false speech; he
speaks truth, adheres to truth, is trustworthy and reliable, one
who is no deceiver of the world. Abandoning malicious speech,
he abstains from malicious speech; he does not repeat else-
where what he has heard here in order to divide [those people]
from these, nor does he repeat to these people what he has
heard elsewhere in order to divide [these people] from those;
thus he is one who reunites those who are divided, a promoter
of friendships, who enjoys concord, rejoices in concord, delights
in concord, a speaker of words that promote concord.
Abandoning harsh speech, he abstains from harsh speech; he
speaks such words as are gentle, pleasing to the ear, and love-
able, as go to the heart, are courteous, desired by many and
agreeable to many. Abandoning gossip, he abstains from gossip;
he speaks at the right time, speaks what is fact, speaks on what
is good, speaks on the Dhamma and the Discipline; at the right
time he speaks such words as are worth recording, reasonable,
moderate, and beneficial.

"He abstains from injuring seeds and plants. He practises eat-
ing only in one part of the day, abstaining from eating at night
and outside the proper time. He abstains from dancing, singing,
music, and theatrical shows. He abstains from wearing garlands,
smartening himself with scent, and embellishing himself with
unguents. He abstains from high and large couches. He abstains
from accepting gold and silver. He abstains from accepting raw
grain. He abstains from accepting raw meat. He abstains from
accepting women and girls. He abstains from accepting men and
women slaves. He abstains from accepting goats and sheep. He
abstains from accepting fowl and pigs. He abstains from accept-
ing elephants, cattle, horses, and mares. He abstains from accept-
ing fields and land. He abstains from going on errands and run-
ning messages. He abstains from buying and selling. He abstains
from false weights, false metals, and false measures. [346] He



450 Kandaraka S utta: Sutta 51


1346


abstains from cheating, deceiving, defrauding, and trickery. He
abstains from wounding, murdering, binding, brigandage, plun-
der, and violence.

15. "He becomes content with robes to protect his body and
with almsfood to maintain his stomach, and wherever he goes
he sets out taking only these with him. Just as a bird, wherever
it goes, flies with its wings as its only burden, so too, the
bhikkhu becomes content with robes to protect his body and
with almsfood to maintain his stomach, and wherever he goes
he sets out taking only these with him. Possessing this aggre-
gate of noble virtue, he experiences within himself a bliss that
is blameless.

16. "On seeing a form with the eye, he does not grasp at its
signs and features. Since, if he left the eye faculty unguarded,
evil unwholesome states of covetousness and grief might invade
him, he practises the way of its restraint, he guards the eye fac-
ulty, he undertakes the restraint of the eye faculty. On hearing a
sound with the ear... On smelling an odour with the nose... On
tasting a flavour with the tongue... On touching a tangible with
the body... On cognizing a mind-object with the mind, he does
not grasp at its signs and features. Since, if he left the mind fac-
ulty unguarded, evil unwholesome states of covetousness and
grief might invade him, he practises the way of its restraint, he
guards the mind faculty, he undertakes the restraint of the mind
faculty. Possessing this noble restraint of the faculties, he experi-
ences within himself a bliss that is unsullied.

17. "He becomes one who acts in full awareness when going
forward and returning; who acts in full awareness when looking
ahead and looking away; who acts in full awareness when flex-
ing and extending his limbs; who acts in full awareness when
wearing his robes and carrying his outer robe and bowl; who
acts in full awareness when eating, drinking, consuming food,
and tasting; who acts in full awareness when defecating and uri-
nating; who acts in full awareness when walking, standing, sit-
ting, falling asleep, waking up, talking, and keeping silent.

18. "Possessing this aggregate of noble virtue, and this noble
restraint of the faculties, and possessing this noble mindfulness
and full awareness, he resorts to a secluded resting place: the
forest, the root of a tree, a mountain, a ravine, a hillside cave, a
charnel ground, a jungle thicket, an open space, a heap of straw.


i 347


To Kandaraka 451


19. "On returning from his almsround, after his meal he sits
down, folding his legs crosswise, setting his body erect, and
establishing mindfulness before him. [347] Abandoning covetous-
ness for the world, he abides with a mind free from covetousness;
he purifies his mind from covetousness. Abandoning ill will and
hatred, he abides with a mind free from ill will, compassionate
for the welfare of all living beings; he purifies his mind from ill
will and hatred. Abandoning sloth and torpor, he abides free
from sloth and torpor, percipient of light, mindful and fully
aware; he purifies his mind from sloth and torpor. Abandoning
restlessness and remorse, he abides unagitated with a mind
inwardly peaceful; he purifies his mind from restlessness and
remorse. Abandoning doubt, he abides having gone beyond
doubt, unperplexed about wholesome states; he purifies his
mind from doubt.

20. "Having thus abandoned these five hindrances, imperfec-
tions of the mind that weaken wisdom, quite secluded from
sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, he enters
upon and abides in the first jhana, which is accompanied by
applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born
of seclusion.

21. "Again, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought,
he enters upon and abides in the second jhana, which has self-
confidence and singleness of mind without applied and sus-
tained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of concentration.

22. "Again, with the fading away as well of rapture, he abides
in equanimity, and mindful and fully aware, still feeling plea-
sure with the body, he enters upon and abides in the third jhana,
on account of which noble ones announce: 'He has a pleasant
abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.'

23. "Again, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and
with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, he enters
upon and abides in the fourth jhana, which has neither-pain-
nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.

24. "When his concentrated mind is thus purified, bright,
unblemished, rid of imperfection, malleable, wieldy, steady,
and attained to imperturbability, he directs it to knowledge of
the recollection of past lives. He recollects his manifold past
lives, that is, one birth, two births, three births, four births, five
births, ten births, twenty births, thirty births, forty births, fifty


452 Kandaraka Sutta: Sutta 51


i 348


births, a hundred births, a thousand births, a hundred thousand
births, many aeons of world-contraction, many aeons of world-
expansion, many aeons of world-contraction and expansion:
'There I was so named, of such a clan, with such an appearance,
such was my nutriment, such my experience of pleasure and
pain, such my life-term; and passing away from there, I reap-
peared elsewhere; and there too I was so named, of such a clan,
with such an appearance, such was my nutriment, such my
experience of pleasure and pain, [348] such my life-term; and
passing away from there, I reappeared here.' Thus with their
aspects and particulars he recollects his manifold past lives.

25. "When his concentrated mind is thus purified, bright,
unblemished, rid of imperfection, malleable, wieldy, steady,
and attained to imperturbability, he directs it to knowledge of
the passing away and reappearance of beings. With the divine
eye, which is purified and surpasses the Tiuman, he sees beings
passing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and
ugly, fortunate and unfortunate. He understands how beings
pass on according to their actions thus: 'These worthy beings
who were ill-conducted in body, speech, and mind, revilers of
noble ones, wrong in their views, giving effect to wrong view in
their actions, on the dissolution of the body, after death, have
reappeared in a state of deprivation, in a bad destination, in
perdition, even in hell; but these worthy beings who were well-
conducted in body, speech, and mind, not revilers of noble
ones, right in their views, giving effect to right view in their
actions, on the dissolution of the body, after death, have reap-
peared in a good destination, even in the heavenly world.' Thus
with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the
human, he sees beings passing away and reappearing, inferior
and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and he
understands how beings pass on according to their actions.

26. "When his concentrated mind is thus purified, bright,
unblemished, rid of imperfection, malleable, wieldy, steady,
and attained to imperturbability, he directs it to knowledge of
the destruction of the taints. He understands as it actually is:
'This is suffering'; he understands as it actually is: 'This is the
origin of suffering'; he understands as it actually is: 'This is the
cessation of suffering'; he understands as it actually is: 'This is
the way leading to the cessation of suffering.' He understands as


i 349


To Kandaraka 453


it actually is: 'These are the taints'; he understands as it actually
is: 'This is the origin of the taints'; he understands as it actually
is: 'This is the cessation of the taints'; he understands as it actu-
ally is: 'This is the way leading to the cessation of the taints/

27. "When he knows and sees thus, his mind is liberated from
the taint of sensual desire, from the taint of being, and from the
taint of ignorance. When it is liberated there comes the knowl-
edge: 'It is liberated.' He understands: 'Birth is destroyed, the
holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done,
there is no more coming to any state of being.'

28. "This, bhikkhus, is called the kind of person who does not
torment himself or pursue the practice of torturing himself and
who does not torment others or pursue the practice of torturing
others [349] - the one who, since he torments neither himself nor
others, is here and now hungerless, extinguished, and cooled,
and abides experiencing bliss, having himself become holy."

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


52 Atthakanagara Sutta
The Man from Atthakanagara


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Venerable Ananda
was living at Beluvagamaka near Vesall.

2. Now on that occasion the householder Dasama of
Atthakanagara had arrived at Pataliputta for some business or
other. Then he went to a certain bhikkhu in Kukkuta's Park, and
after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and asked
him: "Where does the venerable Ananda live now, venerable
sir? I wish to see the venerable Ananda."

"The venerable Ananda is living at Beluvagamaka near Vesall,
householder."

3. When the householder Dasama had completed his business
at Pataliputta, he went to the venerable Ananda at Beluva-
gamaka near Vesall. After paying homage to him, he sat down
at one side and asked him:

"Venerable Ananda, has any one thing been proclaimed by
the Blessed One who knows and sees, accomplished and fully
enlightened, wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and
resolute, his unliberated mind comes to be liberated, his unde-
stroyed taints come to be destroyed, and he attains the supreme
security from bondage that he had not attained before?" 550

"Yes, householder, one such thing has been proclaimed by the
Blessed One." [350]

"What is that one thing, venerable Ananda?"

4. "Here, householder, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and
abides in the first jhana, which is accompanied by applied and
sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure bom of seclusion-
He considers this and understands it thus: This first jhana is
conditioned and volitionally produced. 551 But whatever is con-
ditioned and volitionally produced is impermanent, subject to


454


i 351


The Man from Atthakanagara 455


cessation.' Standing upon that, he attains the destruction of the
taints. 552 But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints,
then because of that desire for the Dhamma, that delight in the
phamma, 553 with the destruction of the five lower fetters he
becomes one due to reappear spontaneously [in the Pure
Abodes] and there attain final Nibbana without ever returning
from that world.

"This is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One who knows
and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened, wherein if a
bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute, his unliberated
mind comes to be liberated, his undestroyed taints come to be
destroyed, and he attains the supreme security from bondage
that he had not attained before.

5. "Again, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought, a
bhikkhu enters and abides in the second jhana... He considers
this and understands it thus: 'This second jhana is conditioned
and volitionally produced. But whatever is conditioned and
volitionally produced is impermanent, subject to cessation.'
Standing upon that, he attains the destruction of the taints. But if
he does not attain the destruction of the taints... without ever
returning from that world.

"This too is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One [351]...
wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute... he
attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not
attained before.

6. "Again, with the fading away as well of rapture, a bhik-
khu... enters upon and abides in the third jhana... He considers
this and understands it thus: 'This third jhana is conditioned
and volitionally produced. But whatever is conditioned and
volitionally produced is -impermanent, subject to cessation.'
Standing upon that, he attains the destruction of the taints. But if
he does not attain the destruction of the taints... with out ever
returning from that world.

"This too is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One...
wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute... he
attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not
attained before.

7. "Again, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain. ..a
bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the fourth jhana... He consid-
ers this and understands it thus: "This fourth jhana is conditioned


456 Atthakanagara Sutta: Sutta 52


i 351

and volitionally produced. But whatever is conditioned and voli-
tionally produced is impermanent, subject to cessation.' Standing
upon that, he attains the destruction of the taints. But if he does
not attain the destruction of the taints... without ever returning
from that world.

"This too is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One...
wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute... he
attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not
attained before.

8. "Again, a bhikkhu abides pervading one quarter with a
mind imbued with loving-kindness, likewise the second, like-
wise the third, likewise the fourth; so above, below, around, and
everywhere, and to all as to himself, he abides pervading the all-
encompassing world with a mind imbued with loving-kindness,
abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without hostility and without
ill will. He considers this and understands it thus: 'This deliver-
ance of mind through loving-kindness is conditioned and voli-
tionally produced. But whatever is conditioned and volitionally
produced is impermanent, subject to cessation.' Standing upon
that, he attains the destruction of the taints. But if he does not
attain the destruction of the taints... without ever returning from
that world.

"This too is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One...
wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute... he
attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not
attained before.

9. "Again, a bhikkhu abides pervading one quarter with a
mind imbued with compassion... without ill will. He considers
this and understands it thus: 'This deliverance of mind through
compassion is conditioned and volitionally produced. But what-
ever is conditioned and volitionally produced is impermanent,
subject to cessation.' Standing upon that, he attains the destruc-
tion of the taints. But if he does not attain the destruction of the
taints. . .without ever returning from that world.

"This too is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One.-
wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute.. -he
attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not
attained before.

10. "Again, a bhikkhu abides pervading one quarter with a
mind imbued with appreciative joy. ..without ill will-


i 352


The Man from A tthakanagara 457


considers this and understands it thus: 'This deliverance of
mind through appreciative joy is conditioned and volitionally
produced. But whatever is conditioned and volitionally produced
is impermanent, subject to cessation.' Standing upon that, he
attains the destruction of the taints. But if he does not attain the
destruction of the taints. . .without ever returning from that world.

"This too is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One...
wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute... he
attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not
attained before.

11. "Again, a bhikkhu abides pervading one quarter with a
mind imbued with equanimity... without ill will. He considers
this and understands it thus: 'This deliverance of mind through
equanimity is conditioned and volitionally produced. But what-
ever is conditioned and volitionally produced is impermanent,
[352] subject to cessation.' Standing upon that, he attains the
destruction of the taints. But if he does not attain the destruction
of the taints. . .without ever returning from that world.

"This too is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One...
wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute... he
attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not
attained before.

12. "Again, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of
form, with the disappearance of perceptions of sensory impact,
with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space
is infinite,' a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of infi-
nite space. He considers this and understands it thus: 'This
attainment of the base of infinite space is conditioned and voli-
tionally produced. But whatever is conditioned and volitionally
produced is impermanent, subject to cessation.' Standing upon
that, he attains the destruction of the taints. But if he does not
attain the destruction of the taints... without ever returning from
that world.

"This too is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One...
Wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute... he
attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not
attained before.

13. "Again, by completely surmounting the base of infinite
space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite,' a bhikkhu enters upon
and abides in the base of infinite consciousness. He considers


1353


458 Atthakanagara Sutta: Sutta 52


this and understands it thus: 'This attainment of the base of L n fj_
nite consciousness is conditioned and volitionally produced. But
whatever is conditioned and volitionally produced is imperma-
nent, subject to cessation.' Standing upon that, he attains the
destruction of the taints. But if he does not attain the destruction of
the taints. . .without ever returning from that world.

"This too is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One.
wherein if a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute... he
attains the supreme security from bondage that he had not
attained before.

14. "Again, by completely surmounting the base of infinite
consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing,' a bhikkhu enters
upon and abides in the base of nothingness. He considers this
and understands it thus: 'This attainment of the base of nothing-
ness is conditioned and volitionally produced. But whatever is
conditioned and volitionally produced is impermanent, subject
to cessation.' Standing upon that, he attains the destruction of
the taints. But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints,
then because of that desire for the Dhamma, that delight in the
Dhamma, with the destruction of the five lower fetters he
becomes one due to reappear spontaneously [in the Pure
Abodes] and there attain final Nibbana without ever returning
from that world.

"This too^is one thing proclaimed by the Blessed One who
knows and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened, wherein if
a bhikkhu abides diligent, ardent, and resolute, his unliberated
mind comes to be liberated, his undestroyed taints come to be
destroyed, and he attains the supreme security from bondage
that he had not attained before." 554

15. When venerable Ananda had spoken, the householder
Dasama of Atthakanagara said to him: "Venerable Ananda, just
as if a man seeking one entrance to a hidden treasure came all
at once upon eleven [353] entrances to a hidden treasure, so too,
while I was seeking one door to the Deathless, I have come all
at once to hear of eleven doors to the Deathless. 555 Just as if a
man had a house with eleven doors and when that house
caught on fire, he could flee to safety by any one of these eleven
doors, so I can flee to safety by any one of these eleven doors to
the Deathless. Venerable sir, these sectarians will even seek a


i 353


The Man from Atthakanagara 459


teacher's fee for their teachers; why shouldn't I make an offer-
ing to the venerable Ananda?"

16. Then the householder Dasama of Atthakanagara assem-
bled the Sangha of bhikkhus from Pataliputta and Vesall, and
with his own hands he served and satisfied them with various
kinds of good food. He presented a pair of cloths to each
bhikkhu, and he presented a triple robe to the venerable
Ananda, and he had a dwelling worth five hundred 556 built for
the venerable Ananda.




53 Sekha Sutta

The Disciple in Higher Training


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing in the Sakyan country at Kapilavatthu in Nigrodha's Park.

2. Now on that occasion a new assembly hall had recently been
built for the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu and it had not yet been
inhabited by any recluse or brahmin or human being at all. Then
the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu went to the Blessed One. After pay-
ing homage to him, they sat down at one side and said to him:

"Venerable sir, a new assembly hall has recently been built
here for the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu and it has not yet been
inhabited by any recluse or brahmin or human being at all.
Venerable sir, let the Blessed One be the first to use it. When the
Blessed One has used it first, then the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu
will use it afterwards. That will lead to their welfare and happi-
ness for a long time." 557 [354]

3. The Blessed«Qne consented in silence. .Then, when they saw
that he had consented, they got up from their seats, and after
paying homage to him, keeping him on their right, they went to
the assembly hall. They covered it completely with coverings
and prepared seats, and they put out a large water jug and hung
up an oil-lamp. Then they went to the Blessed One, and after
paying homage to him, they stood at one side and said:

"Venerable sir, the assembly hall has been covered completely
with coverings and seats have been prepared, a large water jug
has been put out and an oil-lamp hung up. Now is the time for
the Blessed One to do as he thinks fit."

4. Then the Blessed One dressed, and taking his bowl and
outer robe, he went with the Sangha of bhikkhus to the assem-
bly hall. When he arrived, he washed his feet and then entered
the hall and sat down by the central pillar facing the east. And
the bhikkhus washed their feet and then entered the hall and sat


460


i 355


The Disciple in Higher Training 461


down by the western wall facing the east, with the Blessed One
before them. And the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu washed their feet
and entered the hall and sat down by the eastern wall facing the
west, with the Blessed One before them.

5. Then, when the Blessed One had instructed, urged, roused,
and encouraged the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu with talk on the
Dhamma for much of the night, he said to the venerable Ananda:

"Ananda, speak to the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu about the dis-
ciple in higher training who has entered upon the way. 558 My
back is uncomfortable. I will rest it."

“Yes, venerable sir,” the venerable Ananda replied.

Then the Blessed One prepared his patchwork cloak folded in
four and lay down on his right side in the lion's pose, with one
foot overlapping the other, mindful and fully aware, after not-
ing in his mind the time for rising.

6. Then the venerable Ananda addressed Mahanama the
Sakyan thus:

"Mahanama, here a noble disciple is possessed of virtue,
guards the doors of his sense faculties, is moderate in eating,
and devoted to wakefulness; he possesses seven good qualities;
and he is one who obtains at will, without trouble or difficulty,
the four jhanas that constitute the higher mind and provide a
pleasant abiding here and now. [355]

7. "And how is a noble disciple possessed of virtue? Here a
noble disciple is virtuous, he dwells restrained with the restraint
of the Patimokkha, he is perfect in conduct and resort, and see-
ing fear in the slightest fault, he trains by undertaking the train-
ing precepts. This is how a noble disciple is possessed of virtue.

8. "And how does a noble disciple guard the doors of his
sense faculties? On seeing a form with the eye, a noble disciple
does not grasp at its signs and’features. Since, if he left the eye
faculty unguarded, evil unwholesome states of covetousness
and grief might invade him, he practises the way of its
restraint, he guards the eye faculty, he undertakes the restraint
of the eye faculty. On hearing a sound with the ear... On
smelling an odour with the nose... On tasting a flavour with
the tongue... On touching a tangible with the body... on cogniz-
ing a mind-object with the mind, a noble disciple does not
grasp at its signs and features. Since, if he left the mind faculty
unguarded, evil unwholesome states of covetousness and grief


462 Sekha Sutta: Sutta 53


i 356


might invade him, he practises the way of its restraint, he
guards the mind faculty, he undertakes the restraint of the
mind faculty. That is how a noble disciple guards the doors of
his sense faculties.

9. "And how is a noble disciple moderate in eating? Here,
reflecting wisely, a noble disciple takes food neither for amuse-
ment nor for intoxication nor for the sake of physical beauty
and attractiveness, but only for the endurance and continuance
of this body, for ending discomfort, and for assisting the holy
life, considering: 'Thus I shall terminate old feelings without
arousing new feelings and I shall be healthy and blameless and
shall live in comfort.' That is how a noble disciple is moderate
in eating.

10. "And how is a noble disciple devoted to wakefulness?
Here, during the day, while walking back and forth and sitting,
a noble disciple purifies his mind of obstructive states. In the
first watch of the night, while walking back and forth and sit-
ting, he purifies his mind of obstructive states. In the middle
watch of the night he lies down on the right side in the lion's
pose with one foot overlapping the other, mindful and fully
aware, after noting in his mind the time for rising. After rising,
in the third watch of the night, while walking back and forth and
sitting, he purifies his mind of obstructive states. That is how a
noble disciple is devoted to wakefulness. [356]

11. "And how does a nobiie disciple possess' seven good quali-
ties? Here a noble disciple has faith; he places his faith in the
Tathagata's enlightenment thus: 'The Blessed One is accom-
plished, fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge and con-
duct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of per-
sons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened,
blessed/

12. "He has shame; he is ashamed of misconduct in body,
speech, and mind, ashamed of engaging in evil unwholesome
deeds.

13. "He has fear of wrongdoing; he is afraid of misconduct in
body, speech, and mind, afraid of engaging in evil unwhole-
some deeds. 559

14. "He has learned much, remembers what he has learned,
and consolidates what he has learned. Such teachings as are
good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end.


1357


The Disciple in Higher Training 463


with the right meaning and phrasing, and affirm a holy life that
is utterly perfect and pure - such teachings as these he has
learned much of, remembered, recited verbally, investigated
with the mind and penetrated well by view.

15. "He is energetic in abandoning unwholesome states and in
undertaking wholesome states; he is steadfast, firm in striving,
not remiss in developing wholesome states.

16. "He has mindfulness; he possesses the highest mindful-
ness and skill; he recalls and recollects what was done long ago
and spoken long ago. 560

17. "He is wise; he possesses wisdom regarding rise and dis-
appearance that is noble and penetrative and leads to the com-
plete destruction of suffering. 561 That is how a noble disciple
possesses seven good qualities.

18. "And how is a noble disciple one who obtains at will,
without trouble or difficulty, the four jhanas that constitute the
higher mind and provide a pleasant abiding here and now?
Here, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unwholesome states, a noble disciple enters upon and abides in
the first jhana...With the stilling of applied and sustained
thought, he enters upon and abides in the second jhana...With
the fading away as well of rapture. . .he enters upon and abides
in the third jhana...With the abandoning of pleasure and
pain... he enters upon and abides in the fourth jhana, which has
neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to
equanimity. That is how a noble disciple is one who obtains at
will, without trouble or difficulty, the four jhanas that constitute
the higher mind and provide a pleasant abiding here and now.

19. "When a noble disciple has thus become one who is pos-
sessed of virtue, who guards the doors of his sense faculties,
who is moderate in eating, who is devoted to wakefulness, who
possesses seven good qualities, [357] who obtains at will, with-
out trouble or difficulty, the four jhanas that constitute the high-
er mind and provide a pleasant abiding here and now, he is
called one in higher training who has entered upon the way. His
eggs are unspoiled; he is capable of breaking out, capable of
enlightenment, capable of attaining the supreme security from
bondage.

"Suppose there were a hen with eight or ten or twelve eggs,
which she had covered, incubated, and nurtured properly. 562


464 Sekha Sutta: Sutta 53


i 358


Even though she did not wish: 'Oh, that my chicks might pierce
their shells with the points of their claws and beaks and hatch
out safely!' yet the chicks are capable of piercing their shells
with the points of their claws and beaks and hatching out safely.
So too, when a noble disciple has thus become one who is pos-
sessed of virtue... he is called one in higher training who has
entered upon the way. His eggs are unspoiled; he is capable of
breaking out, capable of enlightenment, capable of attaining the
supreme security from bondage.

20. “Having arrived at that same supreme mindfulness whose
purity is due to equanimity, 563 this noble disciple recollects his
manifold past lives... (as Sutta 51, §24)... Thus with their aspects
and particulars he recollects his manifold past lives. This is his
first breaking out like that of the hen's chicks from their shells.

21. “Having arrived at that same supreme mindfulness whose
purity is due to equanimity, with the divine eye, which is puri-
fied and surpasses the human, this noble disciple sees beings
passing away and reappearing... (as Sutta 51, §25). ..he under-
stands how beings pass on according to their actions. This is his
second breaking out like that of the hen's chicks from their shells.

22. “Having arrived at that same supreme mindfulness
whose purity is due to equanimity, by realising for himself
with direct knowledge, this noble disciple here and now enters
upon and abides in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by
wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the taints.
[358] This is his third breaking out like that of the hen's chicks
from their shells. 564 *

23. “When a noble disciple is possessed of virtue, that is his
conduct. When he guards the doors of his sense faculties, that is
his conduct. When he is moderate in eating, that is his conduct.
When he is devoted to wakefulness, that is his conduct. When
he possesses seven good qualities, that is his conduct. When he
is one who obtains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the four
jhanas that constitute the higher mind and provide a pleasant
abiding here and now, that is his conduct. 565

24. "When he recollects his manifold past lives... with their
aspects and particulars, that is his true knowledge. When, with
the divine eye... he sees beings passing away and reappearing
and understands how beings pass on according to their actions,
that is his true knowledge. When, by realising for himself with



i 359


The Disciple in Higher Training 465


direct knowledge, he here and now enters upon and abides in the
deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taint-
less with the destruction of the taints, that is his true knowledge.

25. "This noble disciple is thus said to be perfect in true
knowledge, perfect in conduct, perfect in true knowledge and
conduct. And this stanza was uttered by the Brahma
Sanankumara:

'The noble clan is held to be
The best of people as to lineage;

But best of gods and humans is one
Perfect in true knowledge and conduct.'

%

"Now that stanza was well sung by the Brahma Sanan-
kumara, not ill-sung; it was well spoken, not ill-spoken; it has a
meaning, and is not meaningless; and it was approved by the
Blessed One." 566

26. Then the Blessed One rose and addressed the venerable
Ananda thus: "Good, good, Ananda! It is good that you have
spoken to the Sakyans of Kapilavatthu about the disciple in
higher training who has entered upon the way." [359]

That is what the venerable Ananda said. The Teacher approved.
The Sakyans of Kapilavatthu were satisfied and delighted in the
venerable Ananda 's words.


54 Potaliya Sutta
To Potaliya


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing in the country of the Anguttarapans at a town of theirs
named Apana.

2. Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One dressed, and
taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Apana for alms. When
he had wandered for alms in Apana and had returned from his
almsround, after his meal he went to a certain grove for the day's
abiding. Having entered the grove, he sat down at the root of a
tree.

3. Potaliya the householder, while walking and wandering for
exercise, wearing full dress with parasol and sandals, also went
to the grove, and having entered the grove, he went to the
Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him. When this cour-
teous and amiable talk was finished, he stood at one side. The
Blessed One said to him: "There are seats, householder, sit down
if you like."

When this was said, the householder Potaliya thought: "The
recluse Gotama addresses me as 'householder,'" and angry and
displeased, he remained silent.

A second time the Blessed One said to him: "There are seats,
householder, sit down if you like." And a second time the house-
holder Potaliya thought: "The recluse Gotama addresses me as
'householder,'" and angry and displeased, he remained silent.

A third time the Blessed One said to him: "There are seats,
householder, sit down if you like." When this was said, the
householder Potaliya thought: "The recluse Gotama addresses
me as 'householder,'" and angry and displeased, he said to the
Blessed One: [360] "Master Gotama, it is neither fitting nor prop-
er that you address me as 'householder.'"

"Householder, you have the aspects, marks, and signs of a
householder."


466


i 360


To Potaliya 467


"Nevertheless, Master Gotama, I have given up all my works
and cut off all my affairs."

"In what way have you given up all your works, householder,
and cut off all your affairs?"

"Master Gotama, I have given all my wealth, grain, silver, and
gold to my children as their inheritance. Without advising or
admonishing them, I live merely on food and clothing. That is
how I have given up all my works and cut off all my affairs."

"Householder, the cutting off of affairs as you describe it is
one thing, but in the Noble One's Discipline the cutting off of
affairs is different."

"What is the cutting off of affairs like in the Noble One's
Discipline, venerable sir? It would be good, venerable sir, if the
Blessed One would teach me the Dhamma, showing what the
cutting off of affairs is like in the Noble One's Discipline."

"Then listen, householder, and attend closely to what I shall say."

"Yes, venerable sir," Potaliya the householder replied. The
Blessed One said this:

4. "Householder, there are these eight things in the Noble
One's Discipline that lead to the cutting off of affairs. What are
the eight? With the support of the non-killing of living beings,
the killing of living beings is to be abandoned. With the support
of taking only what is given, the taking of what is not given is to
be abandoned. With the support of truthful speech, false speech
is to be abandoned. With the support of unmalicious speech,
malicious speech is to be abandoned. With the support of
refraining from rapacious greed, 567 rapacious greed is to be
abandoned. With the support of refraining from spiteful scold-
ing, spiteful scolding is to be abandoned. With the support of
refraining from angry despair, angry despair is to be aban-
doned. With the support of non-arrogance, arrogance is to be
abandoned. These are the eight things, stated in brief without
being expounded in detail, that lead to the cutting off of affairs
in the Noble One's Discipline."

5. "Venerable sir, it would be good if, out of compassion, the
Blessed One would expound to me in detail these eight things
that lead to the cutting off of affairs in the Noble One's
Discipline, which have been stated in brief by the Blessed One
without being expounded in detail."

"Then listen, householder, and attend closely to what I shall say."


468 Potaliya Sutta: Sutta 54


i 363


"Yes, venerable sir," Potaliya the householder replied. The
Blessed One said this: [361]

6. "'With the support of the non-killing of living beings, the
killing of living beings is to be abandoned/ So it was said. And
with reference to what was this said? Here a noble disciple con-
siders thus: 'I am practising the way to the abandoning and cut-
ting off of those fetters because of which I might kill living
beings. If I were to kill living beings, I would blame myself for
doing so; the wise, having investigated, would censure me for
doing so; and on the dissolution of the body, after death,
because of killing living beings an unhappy destination would
be expected. But this killing of living beings is itself a fetter and
a hindrance. 568 And while taints, vexation, and fever might
arise through the killing of living beings, there are no taints,
vexation, and fever in one who abstains from killing living
beings.' So it is with reference to this that it was said: 'With the
support of the non-killing of living beings, the killing of living
beings is to be abandoned.'

7. "'With the support of taking only what is given, the taking
of what is not gi vert is to be abandoned.' So it was said. . .

8. "'With the support of truthful speech, false speech is to be
abandoned.' So it was said . . . [362]

9. "'With the support of unmalicious speech, malicious speech
is to be abandoned.' So it was said. . .

10. "'With the support of refraining from rapacious greed,
rapacious greed is to be abandoned.' So it was said...

11. "'With the support of refraining from spiteful scolding,
spiteful scolding is to be abandoned.' So it was said. . .[363]

12. "'With the support of refraining from angry despair, angry
despair is to be abandoned.' So it was said...

13. "'With the support of non-arrogance, arrogance is to be
abandoned.' So it was said. And with reference to what was this
said? Here a noble disciple considers thus: 'I am practising the
way to the abandoning and cutting off of those fetters because of
which I might be arrogant. If I were to be arrogant, I would
blame myself for this; the wise, having investigated, would cen-
sure me for this; and on the dissolution of the body, after death,
because of being arrogant an unhappy destination would be
expected. But this arrogance is itself a fetter and a hindrance.
And while taints, vexation, and fever might arise through arro-


To Potaliya 469


i 364


gance, there are no taints, vexation, and fever for one who is not
arrogant.' So it is with reference to this that it was said: 'With the
support of non-arrogance, arrogance is to be abandoned.' 569 [364]

14. "These eight things that lead to the cutting off of affairs in
the Noble One's Discipline have now been expounded in detail.
But the cutting off of affairs in the Noble One's Discipline has
not yet been achieved entirely and in all ways."

"Venerable sir, how is the cutting off of affairs in the Noble
One's Discipline achieved entirely and in all ways? It would be
good, venerable sir, if the Blessed One would teach me the
Dhamma, showing me how the cutting off of affairs in the
Noble One's Discipline is achieved entirely and in all ways."

"Then listen, householder, and attend closely to what I shall
say."

"Yes, venerable sir," Potaliya the householder replied. The
Blessed One said this:

15. "Householder, suppose a dog, overcome by hunger and
weakness, was waiting by a butcher's shop. 570 Then a skilled
butcher or his apprentice would cut out a skeleton of meatless
bones smeared with blood and toss it to the dog. What do you
think, householder? Would that dog get rid of his hunger and
weakness by gnawing such a skeleton of meatless bones
smeared with blood?"

"No, venerable sir. Why is that? Because that skeleton consist-
ed only of meatless bones smeared with blood. Eventually that
dog would reap weariness and disappointment."

"So too, householder, a noble disciple considers thus: 'Sensual
pleasures have been compared to a skeleton by the Blessed One;
they provide much suffering and much despair, while the dan-
ger in them is great.' Having seen this thus as it actually is with
proper wisdom, he avoids the equanimity that is diversified,
based on diversity, and develops the equanimity that is unified,
based on unity, 571 where clinging to the material things of the
world utterly ceases without remainder.

16. "Householder, suppose a vulture, a crow, or a hawk seized
a piece of meat and flew away, and then vultures, crows, and
hawks flew up and pecked and clawed it. What do you think,
householder? If that vulture, crow, or hawk does not quickly let
go of that piece of meat, wouldn't it incur death or deadly suf-
fering because of that?"



470 Potaliya Sutta: Sutta 54 i 365



"Yes, venerable sir."


"So too, householder, a noble disciple considers thus: 'Sensual
pleasures have been compared to a piece of meat by the Blessed
One; they provide much suffering and much despair, while the
danger in them is great.' [365] Having seen this thus as it actually
is with proper wisdom... clinging to the material things of the
world utterly ceases without remainder.

17. "Householder, suppose a man took a blazing grass torch
and went against the wind. What do you think, householder? If
that man does not quickly let go of that blazing grass torch,
wouldn't that blazing grass torch burn his hand or his arm or
some other part of his body, so that he might incur death or
deadly suffering because of that?"

"Yes, venerable sir."

"So too, householder, a noble disciple considers thus: 'Sensual
pleasures have been compared to a grass torch by the Blessed
One; they provide much suffering and much despair, while the
danger in them is great.' Having seen this thus as it actually is
with proper wisdom...clinging to the material things of the
world utterly ceases without remainder.

18. "Householder, suppose there were a charcoal pit deeper
than a man's height full of glowing coals without flame or
smoke. Then a man came who wanted to live and not to die,
who wanted pleasure and recoiled from pain, and two strong
men seized him by both arms and dragged him towards that
charcoal pit. What do you think, householder? Would that man
twist his body this way and that?"

"Yes, venerable sir. Why is that? Because that man knows that
if he falls into that charcoal pit, he will incur death or deadly
suffering because of that."

"So too, householder, a noble disciple considers thus: 'Sensual
pleasures have been compared to a charcoal pit by the Blessed
One; they provide much suffering and much despair, while the
danger in them is great.' Having seen this thus as it actually is
with proper wisdom... clinging to the material things of the
world utterly ceases without remainder.

19. "Householder, suppose a man dreamt about lovely parks,
lovely groves, lovely meadows, and lovely lakes, and on waking
he saw nothing of it. So too, householder, a noble disciple con-
siders thus: 'Sensual pleasures have been compared to a dream



i 367


To Potaliya 471


by the Blessed One; they provide much suffering and much
despair, while the danger in them is great.' Having seen this
thus as it actually is with proper wisdom... clinging to the mate-
rial things of the world utterly ceases without remainder.

20. "Householder, suppose a man borrowed goods on loan
[366] - a fancy carriage and fine-jewelled earrings - and preceded
and surrounded by those borrowed goods he went to the mar-
ketplace. Then people, seeing him, would say: 'Sirs, that is a rich
man! That is how the rich enjoy their wealth!' Then the owners,
whenever they saw him, would take back their things. What do
you think, householder? Would that be enough for that man to
become dejected?"

"Yes, venerable sir. Why is that? Because the owners took
back their things."

"So too, householder, a noble disciple considers thus: 'Sensual
pleasures have been compared to borrowed goods by the
Blessed One; they provide much suffering and much despair,
while the danger in them is great.' Having seen this thus as it
actually is with proper wisdom... clinging to material things of
the world utterly ceases without remainder.

21. "Householder, suppose there were a dense grove not far
from some village or town, within which there was a tree laden
with fruit but none of its fruit had fallen to the ground. Then a
man came needing fruit, seeking fruit, wandering in search of
fruit, and he entered the grove and saw the tree laden with fruit.
Thereupon he thought: 'This tree is laden with fruit but none of
its fruit has fallen to the ground. I know how to climb a tree, so
let me climb this tree, eat as much fruit as I want, and fill my
bag.' And he did so. Then a second man came needing fruit,
seeking fruit, wandering in search of fruit, and taking a sharp
axe, he too entered the grove and saw that tree laden with fruit.
Thereupon he thought: 'This tree is laden with fruit but none of
its fruit has fallen to the ground. I do not know how to climb a
tree, so let me cut this tree down at its root, eat as much fruit as I
want, and fill my bag.' And he did so. What do you think,
householder? If that first man who had climbed the tree doesn't
come down quickly, when the tree falls, wouldn't he break his
hand or his foot or some other part of his body, [367] so that he
might incur death or deadly suffering because of that?"

"Yes, venerable sir."


472 Potaliya Sutta: Sutta 54


i367


"So too, householder, a noble disciple considers thus: 'Sensual
pleasures have been compared to a fruit tree by the Blessed One;
they provide much suffering and much despair, while the dan-
ger in them is great.' Having seen this thus as it actually is with
proper wisdom, he avoids the equanimity that is diversified,
based on diversity, and develops the equanimity that is unified,
based on unity, where clinging to the material things of the
world utterly ceases without remainder.

22. "Having arrived at that same supreme mindfulness whose
purity is due to equanimity, this noble disciple recollects his
manifold past lives, that is, one birth, two births... (as Sutta 51,
§24 )... Thus with their aspects and particulars he recollects his
manifold past lives.

23. "Having arrived at that same supreme mindfulness whose
purity is due to equanimity, with the divine eye, which is puri-
fied and surpasses the human, this noble disciple sees beings
passing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and
ugly, fortunate and unfortunate... (as Sutta 51, §25 ). ..and he
understands how beings pass on according to their actions.

24. "Having arrived at that same supreme mindfulness whose
purity is due to equanimity, by realising for himself with direct
knowledge, this noble disciple here and now enters upon and
abides in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom
that are taintless with the destruction of the taints.

25. "At this point, householder, the cutting off of affairs in the
Noble One's Discipline has been achieved entirely and in all
ways. What do you think, householder? Do you see in yourself
any cutting off of affairs like this cutting off of affairs in the Noble
One's Discipline when it is achieved entirely and in all ways?"

"Venerable sir, who am I that I should possess any cutting off
of affairs entirely and in all ways like that in the Noble One's
Discipline? I am far indeed, venerable sir, from that cutting off
of affairs in the Noble One's Discipline when it has been
achieved entirely and in all ways. For, venerable sir, though the
wanderers of other sects are not thoroughbreds, we imagined
that they are thoroughbreds; 572 though they are not thorough-
breds, we fed them the food of thoroughbreds; though they are
not thoroughbreds, we set them in the place of thoroughbreds.
But though the bhikkhus are thoroughbreds, we imagined that
they are not thoroughbreds; though they are thoroughbreds, we


i 368


To Potaliya 473


fed them the food of those who are not thoroughbreds; though
they are thoroughbreds, we set them in the place of those who
are not thoroughbreds. But now, venerable sir, [368] as the wan-
derers of other sects are not thoroughbreds, we shall understand
that they are not thoroughbreds; as they are not thoroughbreds,
we shall feed them the food of those who are not thorough-
breds; as they are not thoroughbreds, we shall set them in the
place of those who are not thoroughbreds. But as the bhikkhus
are thoroughbreds, we shall understand that they are thorough-
breds; as they are thoroughbreds, we shall feed them the food of
thoroughbreds; as they are thoroughbreds, we shall set them in
the place of those who are thoroughbreds. Venerable sir, the
Blessed One has inspired in me love for recluses, confidence in
recluses, reverence for recluses.

26. "Magnificent, Master Gotama! Magnificent, Master
Gotama! Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many
ways, as though he were turning upright what had been over-
thrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one
who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with
eyesight to see forms. I go to Master Gotama for refuge and to
the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus. From today let
Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone to
him for refuge for life."


55 Jwaka Sutta
To Jivaka


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Rajagaha in the Mango Grove of Jivaka Komarabhacca. 573

2. Then Jivaka Komarabhacca went to the Blessed One, and
after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and said to
the Blessed One:

3. "Venerable sir, I have heard this: 'They slaughter living
beings for the recluse Gotama; the recluse Gotama knowingly
eats meat prepared for him from animals killed for his sake.'
Venerable sir, do those who speak thus say what has been said
by the Blessed One, and not misrepresent him with what is con-
trary to fact? Do they explain in accordance with the Dhamma in
such a way that nothing which provides a ground for censure
can be legitimately deduced from their assertions?" [369]

4. "Jivaka, those who speak thus do not say what has been

said by me, but misrepresent me with what.is untrue and con-
trary to fact. t

5. "Jivaka, I say that there are three instances in which meat
should not be eaten: when it is seen, heard, or suspected [that
the living being has been slaughtered for the bhikkhu], I say that
meat should not be eaten in these three instances. I say that
there are three instances in which meat may be eaten: when it is
not seen, not heard, and not suspected [that the living being has
been slaughtered for the bhikkhu], I say that meat may be eaten
in these three instances. 574

6. "Here, Jivaka, some bhikkhu lives in dependence upon a
certain village or town. He abides pervading one quarter with a
mind imbued with loving-kindness, likewise the second, like-
wise the third, likewise the fourth; so above, below, around, and
everywhere, and to all as to himself, he abides pervading the all-
encompassing world with a mind imbued with loving-kindness.


474


i 370


To Jwaka 475


abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without hostility and without
ill will. Then a householder or a householder's son comes to him
and invites him for the next day's meal. The bhikkhu accepts, if
he likes. When the night is ended, in the morning he dresses,
and taking his bowl and outer robe, goes to the house of that
householder or householder's son and sits down on a seat made
ready. Then the householder or householder's son serves him
with good almsfood. He does not think: 'How good that the
householder or householder's son serves me with good alms-
food! If only a householder or householder's son might serve me
with such good almsfood in the future!' He does not think thus.
He eats that almsfood without being tied to it, infatuated with it,
and utterly committed to it, seeing the danger in it and under-
standing the escape from it. What do you think, Jlvaka? Would
that bhikkhu on such an occasion choose for his own affliction,
or for another's affliction, or for the affliction of both?" - "No,
venerable sir." - "Does not that bhikkhu sustain himself with
blameless food on that occasion?"

7. "Yes, venerable sir. I have heard this, venerable sir:
'Brahma abides in loving-kindness.' Venerable sir, the Blessed
One is my visible witness to that; for the Blessed One abides in
loving-kindness."

"Jlvaka, any lust, [370] any hate, any delusion whereby ill will
might arise have been abandoned by the Tathagata, cut off at
the root, made like a palm stump, done away with so that they
are no longer subject to future arising. 575 If what you said
referred to that, then I allow it to you."

"Venerable sir, what I said referred to precisely that."

8-10. "Here, Jlvaka, a bhikkhu lives in dependence upon a cer-
tain village or town. He abides pervading one quarter with a
mind imbued with compassion... with a mind imbued with
appreciative joy... with a mind imbued with equanimity, like-
wise the second, likewise the third, likewise the fourth; so
above, below, around, and everywhere, and to all as to himself,
he abides pervading the all-encompassing world with a mind
imbued with equanimity, abundant, exalted, immeasurable,
without hostility and without ill will. Then a householder or a
householder's son comes to him and invites him for the next
day's meal. The bhikkhu accepts, if he likes. ..What do you
think, Jlvaka? Would that bhikkhu on such an occasion choose


476 Jivaka Sutta: Sutta 55


i 371


for his own affliction, or for another's affliction, or for the afflic-
tion of both?" - "No, venerable sir." - "Does not that bhikkhu
sustain himself with blameless food on that occasion?"

11. "Yes, venerable sir. I have heard this, venerable sir:
'Brahma abides in equanimity.' Venerable sir, the Blessed One
is my visible witness to that; for the Blessed One abides in
equanimity."

"Jivaka, any lust, any hate, any delusion whereby cruelty or
discontent or aversion might arise have been abandoned by the
Tathagata, cut off at the root, made like a palm stump, done
away with so that they are no longer subject to future arising. 575
If what you said referred to that, then I allow it to you." [371]

"Venerable sir, what I said referred to precisely that."

12. "If anyone slaughters a living being for the Tathagata or
his disciple, he lays up much demerit in five instances. When he
says: 'Go and fetch that living being,' this is the first instance in
which he lays up much demerit. When that living being experi-
ences pain and grief on being led along with a neck-halter, this
is the second instance in which he lays up much demerit. When
he says: 'Go and slaughter that living being,' this is the third
instance in which he lays up much demerit. When that living
being experiences pain and grief on being slaughtered, this is
the fourth instance in which he lays up much demerit. When he
provides the Tathagata or his disciple with food that is not per-
missible, this is the fifth instance in which he lays up much
demerit. Anyone who slaughters a living being for the
Tathagata or his disciple lays up much demerit in these five
instances."

13. When this was said, Jivaka Komarabhacca said to the
Blessed One: "It is wonderful, venerable sir, it is marvellous!
The bhikkhus sustain themselves with permissible food. The
bhikkhus sustain themselves with blameless food. Magnificent,
venerable sir! Magnificent, venerable sir!... From today let the
Blessed One remember me as a lay follower who has gone to
him for refuge for life." 577


T


56 Upali Sutta
To Upali


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Nalanda in Pavarika's Mango Grove.

2. Now on that occasion the Nigantha Nataputta was staying
at Nalanda with a large assembly of Niganthas. Then, when the
Nigantha [named] Dlgha TapassI 578 had wandered for alms in
Nalanda and had returned from his almsround, after his meal
he went to Pavarika’s Mango Grove to see the Blessed One.
[372] He exchanged greetings with the Blessed One, and when
this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he stood at one
side. As he stood there, the Blessed One said to him: "There are
seats, TapassI, sit down if you like."

3. When this was said, Dlgha TapassI took a low seat and sat
down at one side. Then the Blessed One asked him: "TapassI,
how many kinds of action does the Nigantha Nataputta
describe for the performance of evil action, for the perpetration
of evil action?"

"Friend Gotama, the Nigantha Nataputta is not accustomed to
use the description 'action, action'; the Nigantha Nataputta is
accustomed to use the description 'rod, rod.'" 579

"Then, TapassI, how many kinds of rod does the Nigantha
Nataputta describe for the performance of evil action, for the
perpetration of evil action?"

"Friend Gotama, the Nigantha Nataputta describes three
kinds of rod for the performance of evil action, for the perpetra-
tion of evil action; that is, the bodily rod, the verbal rod, and the
mental rod." 580

"How then, TapassI, is the bodily rod one, the verbal rod
another, and the mental rod still another?"

"The bodily rod is one, friend Gotama, the verbal rod is
another, and the mental rod is still another."


477


478 Upali Sutta: Sutta 56


i 373


"Of these three kinds of rod, Tapassi, thus analysed and dis-
tinguished, which kind of rod does the Nigantha Nataputta
describe as the most reprehensible for the performance of evil
action, for the perpetration of evil action: the bodily rod or the
verbal rod or the mental rod?"

"Of these three kinds of rod, friend Gotama, thus analysed
and distinguished, the Nigantha Nataputta describes the bodily
rod as the most reprehensible for the performance of evil action,
for the perpetration of evil action, and not so much the verbal
rod and the mental rod."

"Do you say the bodily rod, Tapassi?"

"I say the bodily rod, friend Gotama."

"Do you say the bodily rod, Tapassi?"

"I say the bodily rod, friend Gotama."

"Do you say the bodily rod, Tapassi?"

"I say the bodily rod, friend Gotama."

Thus the Blessed One made the Nigantha Dlgha Tapassi main-
tain his statement up to the third time. [373]

4. Then the Nigantha Dlgha Tapassi asked the Blessed One:
"And you, friend Gotama, how many kinds of rod do you
describe for the performance of evil action, for the perpetration
of evil action?"

"Tapassi, the Tathagata is not accustomed to use the descrip-
tion 'rod, rod'; the Tathagata is accustomed to use the descrip-
tion 'action, action.'"

"But, friend Gotama, how many kinds of action do you
describe for the performance of evil action, for the perpetration
of evil action?"

"Tapassi, I describe three kinds of action for the performance
of evil action, for the perpetration of evil action: that is, bodily
action, verbal action, and mental action."

"How then, friend Gotama, is bodily action one, verbal action
another, and mental action still another?"

"Bodily action is one, Tapassi, verbal action is another, and
mental action is still another."

"Of these three kinds of action, friend Gotama, thus analysed
and distinguished, which kind of action do you describe as the
most reprehensible for the performance of evil action, for the
perpetration of evil action: bodily action or verbal action or
mental action?"


i 374


To Upali 479


"Of these three kinds of action, Tapassi, thus analysed and
distinguished, I describe mental action as the most reprehensi-
ble for the performance of evil action, for the perpetration of evil
action, and not so much bodily action and verbal action." 581

"Do you say mental action, friend Gotama?"

"I say mental action, Tapassi."

"Do you say mental action, friend Gotama?"

"I say mental action, Tapassi."

"Do you say mental action, friend Gotama?"

"I say mental action, Tapassi."

Thus the Nigantha Dlgha Tapassi made the Blessed One main-
tain his statement up to the third time, after which he rose from
his seat and went to the Nigantha Nataputta.

5. Now on that occasion the Nigantha Nataputta was seated
together with a very large assembly of laymen from Balaka,
most prominent among them being Upali. The Nigantha
Nataputta saw the Nigantha Dlgha Tapassi coming in the dis-
tance and asked him: "Now where are you coming from in the
middle of the day, Tapassi?"

"I am coming from the presence of the recluse Gotama, ven-
erable sir."

"Did you have some conversation with the recluse Gotama,
Tapassi?" [374]

"I had some conversation with the recluse Gotama, ven-
erable sir."

"What was your conversation with him like, Tapassi?"

Then the Nigantha Dlgha Tapassi related to the Nigantha
Nataputta his entire conversation with the Blessed One.

6. When this was said, the Nigantha Nataputta told him:
"Good, good, Tapassi! The Nigantha Dlgha Tapassi has
answered the recluse Gotama like a well-taught disciple who
understands his teacher's dispensation rightly. What does the
trivial mental rod count for in comparison with the gross bodily
rod? On the contrary, the bodily rod is the most reprehensible
for the performance of evil action, for the perpetration of evil
action, and not so much the verbal rod and the mental rod."

7. When this was said, the householder Upali said to the
Nigantha Nataputta: "Good, good, venerable sir, [on the part of]
Dlgha Tapassi! The venerable Tapassi has answered the recluse
Gotama like a well-taught disciple who understands his


480 Upali Sutta: Sutta 56


i 375


teacher's dispensation rightly. What does the trivial mental rod
count for in comparison with the gross bodily rod? On the con-
trary, the bodily rod is the most reprehensible for the perfor-
mance of evil action, for the perpetration of evil action, and not
so much the verbal rod and the mental rod. Now, venerable sir,
I shall go and refute the recluse Gotama's doctrine on the basis
of this statement. If the recluse Gotama maintains before me
what the venerable Dlgha TapassI made him maintain, then just
as a strong man 582 might seize a long-haired ram by the hair and
drag him to and drag him fro and drag him round about, so in
debate I will drag the recluse Gotama to and drag him fro and
drag him round about. Just as a strong brewer's workman might
throw a big brewer's sieve into a deep water tank, and taking it
by the corners, might drag it to and drag it fro and drag it round
about, so in debate I will drag the recluse Gotama to and drag
him fro and drag him round about. Just as a strong brewer's
mixer might take a strainer by the corners and shake it down
and shake it up and thump it about, so in debate I will shake the
recluse Gotama down [375] and shake him up and thump him
about. And just as a sixty-year-old elephant might plunge into a
deep pond and enjoy playing the game of hemp-washing, so I
shall enjoy playing the game of hemp-washing with the recluse
Gotama. Venerable sir, I shall go and refute the recluse
Gotama's doctrine on the basis of this statement."

"Go, householder, and refute the recluse Gotama's doctrine on
the basis of this statement. For either I should refute the recluse
Gotama's doctrine or else the Nigantha Dlgha TapassI or you
yourself."

8. When this was said, the Nigantha Dlgha TapassI said to the
Nigantha Nataputta: "Venerable sir, I do not think that the house-
holder Upali should [try to] refute the recluse Gotama's doctrine.
For the recluse Gotama is a magician and knows a converting
magic by which he converts disciples of other sectarians."

"It is impossible, TapassI, it cannot happen that the house-
holder Upali should go over to discipleship under the recluse
Gotama; but it is possible, it can happen that the recluse Gotama
might come over to discipleship under the householder Upali.
Go, householder, and refute the recluse Gotama's doctrine. For
either I should refute the recluse Gotama's doctrine or else the
Nigantha Dlgha TapassI or you yourself."


i 376


To Upali 481


For the second time... For the third time, the Nigantha Digha
TapassI said to the Nigantha Nataputta: "Venerable sir, I do not
think that the householder Upali should [try to] refute the
recluse Gotama's doctrine. For the recluse Gotama is a magician
and knows a converting magic by which he converts disciples of
other sectarians."

"It is impossible, TapassI, it cannot happen that the house-
holder Upali should go over to discipleship under the recluse
Gotama; but it is possible, it can happen that the recluse Gotama
might come over to discipleship under the householder Upali.
Go, householder, and refute the recluse Gotama's doctrine. For
either I should refute the recluse Gotama's doctrine or else the
Nigantha Digha TapassI or you yourself."

9. "Yes, venerable sir," the householder Upali replied, and he
rose from his seat, and after paying homage to the Nigantha
Nataputta, keeping him on his right, he left to go to the Blessed
One in Pavarika's Mango Grove. [376] There, after paying homage
to the Blessed One, he sat down at one side and asked the Blessed
One: "Venerable sir, did the Nigantha Digha TapassI come here?"

"The Nigantha Digha TapassI came here, householder."

"Venerable sir, did you have some conversation with him?"

"I had some conversation with him, householder."

"What was your conversation with him like, venerable sir?"

Then the Blessed One related to the householder Upali his
entire conversation with the Nigantha Digha TapassI.

10. When this was said, the householder Upali said to the
Blessed One: "Good, good, venerable sir, on the part of TapassI!
The Nigantha Digha TapassI has answered the Blessed One like
a well-taught disciple who understands his teacher's dispensation
rightly. What does the trivial mental rod count for in compari-
son with the gross bodily rod? On the contrary, the bodily rod is
the most reprehensible for the performance of evil action, for the
perpetration of evil action, and not so much the verbal rod and
the mental rod."

"Householder, if you will debate on the basis of truth, we
might have some conversation about this."

"I will debate on the basis of truth, venerable sir, so let us
have some conversation about this."

11. "What do you think, householder? Here some Nigantha
might be afflicted, suffering, and gravely ill [with an illness


482 Upali Sutta: Sutta 56


i 377


needing treatment by cold water, which his vows prohibit] and
he might refuse cold water [though mentally longing for it] and
use only [the permissible] hot water [thus keeping his vows
bodily and verbally]. Because he does not get cold water he
might die. Now, householder, where would the Nigantha
Nataputta describe his rebirth [as taking place]?"

"Venerable sir, there are gods called 'mind-bound'; he would
be reborn there. Why is that? Because when he died he was still
bound [by attachment] in the mind." 583

"Householder, householder, pay attention how you reply!
What you said before does not agree with what you said after-
wards, nor does what you said afterwards agree with what you
said before. Yet you made this statement: 'I will debate on the
basis of truth, venerable sir, so let us have some conversation
about this.'"

"Venerable sir, although the Blessed One has spoken thus, yet
the bodily rod is the most reprehensible for the performance of
evil action, for the perpetration of evil action, and not so much
the verbal rod and the mental rod." 584

12. "What do you think, [377] householder? Here some
Nigantha might be restrained with four checks - curbed by all
curbs, clamped by all curbs, cleansed by all curbs, and claimed
by all curbs 585 - and yet when going forward and returning he
brings about the destruction of many small living beings. What
result does the Nigantha Nataputta describe for him?"

"Venerable sir, the Nigantha Nataputta does not describe
what is not willed as greatly reprehensible."

"But if one wills it, householder?"

"Then it is greatly reprehensible, venerable sir."

"But under which [of the three rods] does the Nigantha
Nataputta describe willing, householder?"

"Under the mental rod, venerable sir." 586

"Householder, householder, pay attention how you reply!
What you said before does not agree with what you said after-
wards, nor does what you said afterwards agree with what you
said before. Yet you made this statement: 'I will debate on the
basis of truth, venerable sir, so let us have some conversation
about this.'"

"Venerable sir, although the Blessed One has spoken thus, yet
the bodily rod is the most reprehensible for the performance of


i 378


To Upali 483


evil action, for the perpetration of evil action, and not so much
the verbal rod and the mental rod."

13. "What do you think, householder? Is this town of
Nalanda successful and prosperous, is it populous and crowded
with people?"

"Yes, venerable sir, it is."

"What do you think, householder? Suppose a man came here
brandishing a sword and spoke thus: 'In one moment, in one
instant, I will make all the living beings in this town of Nalanda
into one mass of flesh, into one heap of flesh.' What do you
think, householder, would that man be able to do that?"

"Venerable sir, ten, twenty, thirty, forty, or even fifty men
would not be able to make all the living beings in this town of
Nalanda into one mass of flesh, into one heap of flesh in one
moment or instant, so what does a single trivial man count for?"

"What do you think, householder? Suppose some recluse or
brahmin came here possessed of supernormal power and
attained to mastery of mind, and he spoke thus: 'I will reduce
this town of Nalanda to ashes with one mental act of hate.' What
do you think, householder, would such a recluse or brahmin be
able to do that?" [378]

"Venerable sir, such a recluse or brahmin possessed of super-
normal power and attained to mastery of mind would be able to
reduce ten, twenty, thirty, forty, or even fifty Nalandas to ashes
with one mental act of hate, so what does a single trivial
Nalanda count for?"

"Householder, householder, pay attention how you reply! What
you said before does not agree with what you said afterwards, nor
does what you said afterwards agree with what you said before.
Yet you made this statement: 'I will debate on the basis of truth,
venerable sir, so let us have some conversation about this.'"

"Venerable sir, although the Blessed One has spoken thus, yet
the bodily rod is the most reprehensible for the performance of
evil action, for the perpetration of evil action, and not so much
the verbal rod and the mental rod."

14. "What do you think, householder? Have you heard how
the Dandaka, Kalinga, Mejjha, and Matanga forests became
forests?" 587 - "Yes, venerable sir." - "As you heard it, how did
they become forests?" - "Venerable sir, I heard that they became
forests by means of a mental act of hate on the part of the seers."


484 Upali Sutta: Sutta 56


i 379


"Householder, householder, pay attention how you reply!
What you said before does not agree with what you said after-
wards, nor does what you said afterwards agree with what you
said before. Yet you made this statement: 'I will debate on the
basis of truth, venerable sir, so let us have some conversation
about this.'"

15. "Venerable sir, I was satisfied and pleased by the Blessed
One's very first simile. Nevertheless, I thought I would oppose
the Blessed One thus since I desired to hear the Blessed One's
varied solutions to the problem. Magnificent, venerable sir!
Magnificent, venerable sir! The Blessed One has made the
Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning
upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden,
showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in
the dark for those with eyesight to see forms. Venerable sir, I go
to the Blessed One for refuge [379] and to the Dhamma and to
the Sangha of bhikkhus. Let the Blessed One remember me as a
lay follower who has gone to him for refuge for life."

16. "Investigate thoroughly, householder. It is good for such
well-known people like you to investigate thoroughly."

"Venerable sir, I am even more satisfied and pleased with the
Blessed One for telling me that. For the other sectarians, on
acquiring me as their disciple, would carry a banner all over
Nalanda announcing: 'The householder Upali has come to dis-
cipleship under us.' But, on the contrary, the Blessed One tells
me: 'Investigate thoroughly, householder. It is good for such
well-known people like you to investigate thoroughly.' So for
the second time, venerable sir, I go to the Blessed One for refuge
and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus. Let the
Blessed One remember me as a lay follower who has gone to
him for refuge for life."

17. "Householder, your family has long supported the
Niganthas and you should consider that alms should be given to
them when they come."

"Venerable sir, I am even more satisfied and pleased with the
Blessed One for telling me that. Venerable sir, I have heard that
the recluse Gotama says thus: 'Gifts should be given only to me;
gifts should not be given to others. Gifts should be given only to
my disciples; gifts should not be given to others' disciples. Only
what is given to me is very fruitful, not what is given to others.


i 380


To Upali 485


Only what is given to my disciples is very fruitful, not what is
given to others' disciples.' But, on the contrary, the Blessed One
encourages me to give gifts to the Niganthas. Anyway we shall
know the time for that, venerable sir. So for the third time, ven-
erable sir, I go to the Blessed One for refuge and to the Dhamma
and to the Sangha of bhikkhus. Let the Blessed One remember
me as a lay follower who has gone to him for refuge for life."

18. Then the Blessed One gave the householder Upali progres-
sive instruction, that is, talk on giving, talk on virtue, talk on the
heavens; he explained the danger, degradation, and defilement
in sensual pleasures and the blessing of renunciation. When he
knew that the householder Upali's mind [380] was ready, recep-
tive, free from hindrances, elated, and confident, he expounded
to him the teaching special to the Buddhas: suffering, its origin,
its cessation, and the path. Just as a clean cloth with all marks
removed would take dye evenly, so too, while the householder
Upali sat there, the spotless immaculate vision of the Dhamma
arose in him: "All that is subject to arising is subject to cessa-
tion." 588 Then the householder Upali saw the Dhamma, attained
the Dhamma, understood the Dhamma, fathomed the Dhamma;
he crossed beyond doubt, did away with perplexity, gained
intrepidity, and became independent of others in the Teacher's
Dispensation. 589 Then he said to the Blessed One: "Now, vener-
able sir, we must go. We are busy and have much to do."

"Now is the time, householder, to do as you think fit."

19. Then the householder Upali, having delighted and rejoiced
in the Blessed One's words, rose from his seat, and after paying
homage to the Blessed One, keeping him on his right, he left to
return to his own house. There he addressed the doorkeeper
thus: "Good doorkeeper, from today on I close my door to the
Niganthas and the Niganthls, and I open my door to the Blessed
One's bhikkhus, bhikkhunls, men lay followers, and women lay
followers. If any Nigantha comes, then tell him thus: 'Wait, ven-
erable sir, do not enter. From today on the householder Upali
has gone over to discipleship under the recluse Gotama. He has
closed his door to the Niganthas and Niganthls, and he has
opened it to the Blessed One's bhikkhus, bhikkhunls, men lay
followers, and women lay followers. Venerable sir, if you need
alms, wait here; they will bring it to you here.'" - "Yes, vener-
able sir," the doorkeeper replied.



486 Upali Sutta: Sutta 56


i 381


20. The Nigantha Dlgha TapassI heard: "The householder
Upali has gone over to discipleship under the recluse Gotama."
Then he went to the Nigantha Nataputta and told him:
"Venerable sir, I have heard thus: 'The householder Upali has
gone over to discipleship under the recluse Gotama.'"

"It is impossible, TapassI, it cannot happen that the house-
holder Upali should go over to discipleship under the recluse
Gotama; but it is possible, it can happen that the recluse
Gotama might come over to discipleship under the householder
Upali." [381]

A second time... And a third time the Nigantha Dlgha TapassI
told the Nigantha Nataputta: "Venerable sir, I have heard thus:
'The householder Upali has gone over to discipleship under the
recluse Gotama.'"

"It is impossible, TapassI, it cannot happen. .."

"Venerable sir, shall I go and find out whether or not the
householder Upali has gone over to discipleship under the
recluse Gotama?"

"Go, TapassI, and find out whether or not he has gone over to
discipleship under the recluse Gotama."

21. Then the Nigantha Dlgha TapassI went to the householder
Upali's house. The doorkeeper saw him coming in the distance
and told him: "Wait, venerable sir, do not enter. From today on
the householder Upali has gone over to discipleship under the
recluse Gotama. He has closed his door to the Niganthas and
Niganthls, and he has opened it to the Blessed One's bhikkhus,
bhikkhunls, men lay followers, and women lay followers.
Venerable sir, if you need alms, wait here; they will bring it to
you here."

"I do not need alms, friend," he said, and he turned back and
went to the Nigantha Nataputta and told him: "Venerable sir, it
is only too true that the householder Upali has gone over to dis-
cipleship under the recluse Gotama. Venerable sir, I did not get
your consent when I told you: 'Venerable sir, I do not think that
the householder Upali should [try to] refute the recluse
Gotama's doctrine. For the recluse Gotama is a magician and
knows a converting magic by which he converts disciples of
other sectarians.' And now, venerable sir, your householder
Upali has been converted by the recluse Gotama with his con-
verting magic!"


i 383


To Upali 487


"It is impossible, Tapassi, it cannot happen that the house-
holder Upali should go over to discipleship under the recluse
Gotama; but it is possible, it can happen that the recluse Gotama
might come over to discipleship under the householder Upali."

A second time... And a third time the Nigantha Dlgha Tapassi
told the Nigantha Nataputta: "Venerable sir, it is only too true
that the householder Upali has gone over to discipleship under
the recluse Gotama [382]... with his converting magic!"

"It is impossible, Tapassi, it cannot happen... it can happen
that the recluse Gotama might come over to discipleship under
the householder Upali. Now I shall go myself and find out
whether or not he has gone over to discipleship under the
recluse Gotama."

22. Then the Nigantha Nataputta went with a large assembly
of Niganthas to the householder Upali's house. The doorkeeper
saw him coming in the distance and told him: "Wait, venerable
sir, do not enter. From today on the householder Upali has gone
over to discipleship under the recluse Gotama. He has closed his
door to the Niganthas and Niganthis, and he has opened his
door to the Blessed One's bhikkhus, bhikkhunls, men lay fol-
lowers, and women lay followers. Venerable sir, if you need
alms, wait here; they will bring it to you here."

"Good doorkeeper, go to the householder Upali and tell him:
'Venerable sir, the Nigantha Nataputta is standing at the outer
gate with a large assembly of Niganthas; he wishes to see you.'"

"Yes, venerable sir," he replied, and he went to the householder
Upali and told him: "Venerable sir, the Nigantha Nataputta is
standing at the outer gate with a large assembly of Niganthas;
he wishes to see you."

"In that case, good doorkeeper, make seats ready in the hall of
the central door."

"Yes, venerable sir," he replied, and after he had made seats
ready in the hall of the central door, he returned to the house-
holder Upali and told him: "Venerable sir, the seats are made
ready in the hall of the central door. Now it is time to do as you
think fit."

23. Then the householder Upali [383] went to the hall of the
central door and sat down on the highest, best, chief, most
excellent seat there. Then he told the doorkeeper: "Now, good
doorkeeper, go to the Nigantha Nataputta and tell him:


488 Upali Sutta: Sutta 56


i 384


'Venerable sir, the householder Upali says: "Enter, venerable
sir, if you wish/""

"Yes, venerable sir," he replied, and he went to the Nigantha
Nataputta and told him: "Venerable sir, the householder Upali
says: 'Enter, venerable sir, if you wish.'"

Then the Nigantha Nataputta went with the large assembly of
Niganthas to the hall of the central door.

24. Previously, when the householder Upali saw the Nigantha
Nataputta coming in the distance, he used to go out to meet
him, dust off the highest, best, chief, most excellent seat there
with an upper robe, and having arranged it all around, have
him seated on it. But now, while seated himself on the highest,
best, chief, most excellent seat, he told Nigantha Nataputta:
"Venerable sir, there are seats; sit down if you wish."

25. When this was said, the Nigantha Nataputta said:
"Householder, you are mad, you are an imbecile. You went say-
ing: 'Venerable sir, I shall refute the recluse Gotama's doctrine,'
and you have come back all caught up in a vast net of doctrine.
Just as if a man went to castrate someone and came back castrat-
ed on both sides, just as if a man went to put out someone's eyes
and came back with both his eyes put out; so you too, house-
holder, went saying: 'Venerable sir, I shall refute the recluse
Gotama's doctrine,' and you have come back all caught up in a
vast net of doctrine. Householder, you have been converted by
the recluse Gotama with his converting magic!"

26. "Auspicious is that converting magic, venerable sir, good is
that converting magic! 590 Venerable sir, if my beloved kinsmen
and relatives were to be converted by this conversion, it would
lead to the welfare and happiness of my beloved kinsmen and
relatives for a long time. If all nobles were to be converted by
this conversion, it would lead to the welfare and happiness of
the nobles for a longtime. [384] If all brahmins... all merchants...
all workers were to be converted by this conversion, it would
lead to the welfare and happiness of the workers for a long time.
If the world with its gods, its Maras, and its Brahmas, this gener-
ation with its recluses and brahmins, its princes and its people,
were to be converted by this conversion, it would lead to the
welfare and happiness of the world for a long time. As to this,
venerable sir, I shall give you a simile; for some wise men here
understand the meaning of a statement by a simile.


27. "Venerable sir, there was once a brahmin who was old,
aged, and burdened with years, and he had as a wife a young
brahmin girl who was pregnant and near her confinement. Then
she told him: 'Go, brahmin, buy a young monkey in the market
and bring it back to me as a playmate for my child/ He replied:
'Wait, madam, till you have borne the child. If you bear a boy,
then I will go to the market and buy a young male monkey and
bring it back to you as a playmate for your little boy; but if you
bear a girl, then I will go to the market and buy a young female
monkey and bring it back to you as a playmate for your little
girl.' For the second time she made the same request and
received the same answer. For the third time she made the same
request. Then, since his mind was bound to her with love, he
went to the market, bought a young male monkey, brought it
back, and told her: 'I have bought this young male monkey in
the market [385] and brought it back to you as a playmate for
your child.' Then she told him: 'Go, brahmin, take this young
male monkey to Rattapani the dyer's son and tell him: "Good
Rattapani, I want this young male monkey dyed the colour called
yellow-unguent, pounded and re-pounded, and smoothened out
on both sides.'" Then, since his mind was bound to her with
love, he took the young male monkey to Rattapani the dyer's
son and told him: 'Good Rattapani, I want this young male
monkey dyed the colour called yellow-unguent, pounded and
re-pounded, and smoothened out on both sides.' Rattapani the
dyer's son told him: 'Venerable sir, this young male monkey
will take a dyeing but not a pounding or a smoothening out.' So
too, venerable sir, the doctrine of the foolish Niganthas will give
delight to fools but not to the wise, and it will not withstand
testing or being smoothened out.

"Then, venerable sir, on another occasion that brahmin took a
pair of new garments to Rattapani the dyer's son and told him:
'Good Rattapani, I want this pair of new garments dyed the
colour called yellow-unguent, pounded and re-pounded, and
smoothened out on both sides.' Rattapani the dyer's son told
him: 'Venerable sir, this pair of new garments will take a dyeing
and a pounding and a smoothening out.' So too, venerable sir,
the doctrine of that Blessed One, accomplished and fully
enlightened, will give delight to the wise but not to fools, and it
will withstand testing and being smoothened out."


490 Upali Sutta: Sutta 56


i 386


28. "Householder, the assembly and the king know you thus:
'The householder Upali is a disciple of the Nigantha Nataputta.'
Whose disciple should we consider you to be?"

When this was said, the householder Upali rose from his seat,
and arranging his upper robe on one shoulder, [386] he extended
his hands in reverential salutation in the direction of the Blessed
One and told the Nigantha Nataputta:

29. "In that case, venerable sir, hear whose disciple I am:

He is the Wise One who has cast off delusion,
abandoned the heart's wilderness, 591 victor in battle;

He knows no anguish, is perfectly even-minded,
mature in virtue, of excellent wisdom;

Beyond all temptations, 592 he is without stain:

The Blessed One is he, and I am his disciple.

Free from perplexity, he abides contented,
spurning worldly gains, a vessel of gladness;

A human being who has done the recluse's duty,
a man who bears his final body;

He is utterly peerless and utterly spotless:

The Blessed One is he, and I am his disciple.

He is free from doubt and skilful,
the discipliner and excellent leader.

None can surpass his resplendent qualities;
without hesitation, he is the illuminator;

Having severed conceit, he is the hero:

The Blessed One is he, and I am his disciple.

The leader of the herd, he cannot be measured,
his depths are unfathomed, he attained to the silence; 593
Provider of safety, possessor of knowledge,
he stands in the Dhamma, inwardly restrained;

Having overcome all bondage, he is liberated:

The Blessed One is he, and I am his disciple.

The immaculate tusker, living in remoteness,
with fetters all shattered, fully freed;

Skilled in discussion, imbued with wisdom.


To Upali 491


i 386


his banner lowered, 594 he no longer lusts;

Having tamed himself, he no more proliferates: 595
The Blessed One is he, and I am his disciple.

The best of seers, 596 with no deceptive schemes,
gained the triple knowledge, attained to holiness;

His heart cleansed, a master of discourse,
he lives ever tranquil, the finder of knowledge;

The first of all givers, he is ever capable:

The Blessed One is he, and I am his disciple.

He is the Noble One, developed in mind,
who has gained the goal and expounds the truth;
Endowed with mindfulness and penetrative insight,
he leans neither forwards nor back; 597
Free from perturbation, attained to mastery:

The Blessed One is he, and I am his disciple.

He has fared rightly and abides in meditation,
inwardly undefiled, in purity perfect;

He is independent and altogether fearless, 598
living secluded, attained to the summit;

Having crossed over himself, he leads us across:

The Blessed One is he, and I am his disciple.

Of supreme serenity, with extensive wisdom,
a man of great wisdom, devoid of all greed;

He is the Tathagata, he is the Sublime One,
the person unrivalled, the one without equal;

He is intrepid, proficient in all:

The Blessed One is he, and I am his disciple.

He has severed craving and become the Enlightened One,
cleared of all clouds, completely untainted;

Most worthy of gifts, most mighty of spirits,
most perfect of persons, beyond estimation;

The greatest in grandeur, attained the peak of glory:

The Blessed One is he, and I am his disciple."


492 Upali Sutta: Sutta 56 i 387

30. "When did you concoct that hymn of praise to the recluse
Gotama, householder?"

"Venerable sir, suppose there were a great heap of many
kinds of flowers, [387] and then a clever garland-maker or
garland-maker's apprentice were to knot them into a multi-
coloured garland; so too, venerable sir, the Blessed One has
many praiseworthy qualities, many hundred praiseworthy qual-
ities. Who, venerable sir, would not praise the praiseworthy?”

31. Then, since the Nigantha Nataputta was unable to bear
this honour done to the Blessed One, hot blood then and there
gushed from his mouth. 599


57 Kukkuravatika Sutta
The Dog-duty Ascetic


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing in the Koliyan country at a town of the Koliyans named
Haliddavasana.

2. Then Punna, son of the Koliyans, an ox-duty ascetic, and
also Seniya, a naked dog-duty ascetic, went to the Blessed
One. 600 Punna, the ox-duty ascetic, paid homage to the Blessed
One and sat down at one side, while Seniya, the naked dog-duty
ascetic, exchanged greetings with the Blessed One, and when
this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he too sat down at
one side curled up like a dog. Punna, the ox-duty ascetic, said
to the Blessed One: "Venerable sir, this Seniya is a naked dog-
duty ascetic who does what is hard to do: he eats his food when
it is thrown to the ground. He has long taken up and practised
that dog-duty. What will be his destination? What will be his
future course?"

"Enough, Punna, let that be. Do not ask me that."

A second time... And a third time Punna, the ox-duty ascetic,
said to the Blessed One: "Venerable sir, this Seniya is a naked
dog-duty ascetic who does what is hard to do: he eats his food
when it is thrown to the ground. He has long taken up and prac-
tised that dog-duty. What will be his destination? What will be
his future course?"

"Well, Punna, since I certainly cannot persuade you when I
say: 'Enough, Punna, let that be. Do not ask me that,' I shall
therefore answer you.

3. "Here, Punna, someone develops the dog-duty fully and
uninterruptedly; he develops the dog-habit fully and uninter-
ruptedly; he develops the dog-mind fully [388] and uninterrupt-
edly; he develops dog-behaviour fully and uninterruptedly.
Having done so, on the dissolution of the body, after death, he


493


494 Kukkuravatika Sutta: Sutta 57


i 389


reappears in the company of dogs. But if he has such a view as
this: 'By this virtue or observance or asceticism or holy life I
shall become a [great] god or some [lesser] god/ that is wrong
view in his case. Now there are two destinations for one with
wrong view, I say: hell or the animal realm. 601 So, Punna, if his
dog-duty succeeds, it will lead him to the company of dogs; if it
fails, it will lead him to hell."

4. When this was said, Seniya the naked dog-duty ascetic cried
out and burst into tears. Then the Blessed One told Punna, son of
the Koliyans, the ox-duty ascetic: "Punna, I could not persuade
you when I said: 'Enough, Punna, let that be. Do not ask me that.'"

[Then Seniya the naked dog-duty ascetic said:] "Venerable sir,
I am not crying because the Blessed One has said this about me,
but because I have long taken up and practised this dog-duty.
Venerable sir, this Punna, son of the Koliyans, is an ox-duty
ascetic. He has long taken up and practised that ox-duty. What
will be his destination? What will be his future course?"

"Enough, Seniya, let that be. Do not ask me that."

A second time... And a third time Seniya the naked dog-duty
ascetic asked the Blessed One: "Venerable sir, this Punna, son of
the Koliyans, is an ox-duty ascetic. He has long taken up and
practised that ox-duty. What will be his destination? What will
be his future course?"

"Well, Seniya, since I certainly cannot persuade you when I
say: 'Enough, Seniya, let that be. Do not ask me that,' I shall
therefore answer you.

5. "Here, Seniya, someone develops the ox-duty fully and
uninterruptedly; he develops the ox-habit fully and uninterrupt-
edly; he develops the ox-mind fully and uninterruptedly; he
develops ox-behaviour fully and uninterruptedly. Having done
so, on the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears in
the company of oxen. [389] But if he has such a view as this: 'By
this virtue or observance or asceticism or holy life I shall become
a [great] god or some [lesser] god/ that is wrong view in his
case. Now there are two destinations for one with wrong view, I
say: hell or the animal realm. So, Seniya, if his ox-duty succeeds,
it will lead him to the company of oxen; if it fails, it will lead
him to hell."

6. When this was said, Punna, son of the Koliyans, the ox-duty
ascetic cried out and burst into tears. Then the Blessed One told


i 390


The Dog-duty Ascetic 495


Seniya the naked dog-duty ascetic: "Seniya, I could not persuade
you when I said: 'Enough, Seniya, let that be. Do not ask me that.'"

[Then Punna the ox-duty ascetic said:] "Venerable sir, I am not
crying because the Blessed One has said this about me, but
because 1 have long taken up and practised this ox-duty.
Venerable sir, I have confidence in the Blessed One thus: 'The
Blessed One is capable of teaching me the Dhamma in such a
way that I can abandon this ox-duty and that this Seniya the
naked dog-duty ascetic can abandon that dog-duty.'"

"Then, Punna, listen and attend closely to what I shall say." -
"Yes, venerable sir," he replied. The Blessed One said this:

7. "Punna, there are four kinds of action proclaimed by me
after realising them for myself with direct knowledge. What are
the four? There is dark action with dark result; there is bright
action with bright result; there is dark-and-bright action with
dark-and-bright result; and there is action that is neither dark
nor bright with neither-dark-nor-bright result, action that leads
to the destruction of action.

8. "And what, Punna, is dark action with dark result? Here
someone generates an afflictive bodily formation, an afflictive
verbal formation, an afflictive mental formation. 602 Having gener-
ated an afflictive bodily formation, an afflictive verbal formation,
an afflictive mental formation, he reappears in an afflictive
world. 603 When he has reappeared in an afflictive world, afflictive
contacts touch him. Being touched by afflictive contacts, he feels
afflictive feelings, extremely painful, as in the case of the beings in
[390] hell. Thus a being's reappearance is due to a being: 604 one
reappears through the actions one has performed. When one has
reappeared, contacts touch one. Thus I say beings are the heirs of
their actions. This is called dark action with dark result.

9. "And what, Punna, is bright action with bright result? Here
someone generates an unafflictive bodily formation, an unaf-
flictive verbal formation, an unafflictive mental formation. 605
Having generated an unafflictive bodily formation, an unafflictive
verbal formation, an unafflictive mental formation, he reappears
in an unafflictive world. 606 When he has reappeared in an unaf-
flictive world, unafflictive contacts touch him. Being touched by
unafflictive contacts, he feels unafflictive feelings, extremely
pleasant, as in the case of the gods of Refulgent Glory. Thus a
being's reappearance is due to a being; one reappears through



496 Kukkuravatika Sutta: Sutta 57


i 391


the actions one has performed. When one has reappeared, con-
tacts touch one. Thus I say beings are the heirs of their actions.
This is called bright action with bright result.

10. "And what, Punna, is dark-and-bright action with dark-
and-bright result? Here someone generates a bodily formation
that is both afflictive and unafflictive, a verbal formation that is
both afflictive and unafflictive, a mental formation that is both
afflictive and unafflictive. 607 Having generated a bodily forma-
tion, a verbal formation, a mental formation that is both afflictive
and unafflictive, he reappears in a world that is both afflictive
and unafflictive. When he has reappeared in a world that is both
afflictive and unafflictive, both afflictive and unafflictive contacts
touch him. Being touched by both afflictive and unafflictive con-
tacts, he feels both afflictive and unafflictive feelings, mingled
pleasure and pain, as in the case of human beings and some
gods and some beings in the lower worlds. Thus a being's reap-
pearance is due to a being: one reappears through the actions
one has performed. When one has reappeared, contacts touch
one. Thus I say beings are the heirs to their actions. This is called
dark-and-bright action with dark-and-bright result. [391]

11. "And what, Punna, is action that is neither dark nor bright
with neither-dark-nor-bright result, action that leads to the
destruction of action? Therein, the volition in abandoning the
kind of action that is dark with dark result, and the volition in
abandoning the kind of action that is bright with bright result,
and the volition in abandoning the kind of action that is dark
and bright with dark-and-bright result: this is called action that
is neither dark nor bright with neither-dark-nor-bright result,
action that leads to the destruction of action. 608 These are the
four kinds of action proclaimed by me after realising them for
myself with direct knowledge."

12. When this was said, Punna, son of the Koliyans, the ox-
duty ascetic said to the Blessed One: "Magnificent, venerable sir!
Magnificent, venerable sir! The Blessed One has made the
Dhamma clear in many ways... From today let the Blessed One
remember me as a lay follower who has gone to him for refuge
for life."

13. But Seniya the naked dog-duty ascetic said to the Blessed
One: "Magnificent, venerable sir! Magnificent, venerable sir!
The Blessed One has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as


i 392


The Dog-duty Ascetic 497


though he were turning upright what had been overthrown,
revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was
lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with eyesight to
see forms. I go to the Blessed One for refuge and to the Dhamma
and to the Sangha of bhikkhus. I would receive the going forth
under the Blessed One, I would receive the full admission."

14. "Seniya, one who formerly belonged to another sect and
desires the going forth and the full admission in this Dhamma
and Discipline lives on probation for four months. 609 At the end
of four months, if the bhikkhus are satisfied with him, they give
him the going forth and the full admission to the bhikkhus'
state. But I recognise individual differences in this matter." 610

"Venerable sir, if those who formerly belonged to another sect
and desire the going forth and the full admission in this
Dhamma and Discipline live on probation for four months, and
if at the end of the four months the bhikkhus being satisfied
with them give them the going forth and the full admission to
the bhikkhus' state, then I will live on probation for four years.
At the end of the four years if the bhikkhus are satisfied with
me, let them give me the going forth and the full admission to
the bhikkhus' state."

15. Then Seniya the naked dog-duty ascetic received the going
forth under the Blessed One, and he received the full admission.
And soon, not long after his full admission, dwelling alone,
withdrawn, [392] diligent, ardent, and resolute, the venerable
Seniya, by realising for himself with direct knowledge, here and
now entered upon and abided in that supreme goal of the holy
life for the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth from the
home life into homelessness. He directly knew: "Birth is
destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has
been done, there is no more coming to any state of being." And
the venerable Seniya became one of the arahants.


58 Abhayarajakumara Sutta
To Prince Abhaya


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Rajagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels' Sanctuary.

2. Then Prince Abhaya 611 went to the Nigantha Nataputta, and
after paying homage to him, sat down at one side. Thereupon
the Nigantha Nataputta said to him:

3. "Come, prince, refute the recluse Gotama's doctrine, and a
good report of you will be spread to this effect: 'Prince Abhaya
has refuted the doctrine of the recluse Gotama, who is so power-
ful and mighty.'"

"But how, venerable sir, shall I refute his doctrine?"

"Come, prince, go to the recluse Gotama and say: 'Venerable sir,
would the Tathagata utter speech that would be unwelcome and
disagreeable to others?' If the recluse Gotama, on being asked
thus, answers: 'The Tathagata, prince, would utter speech that
would be unwelcome and disagreeable to others,' then say to him:
'Then, venerable sir, what is the difference between you and an
ordinary person? For an ordinary person also would utter speech
that would be unwelcome and disagreeable to others.' But if the
recluse Gotama, on being asked thus, answers: 'The Tathagata,
prince, would not utter speech [393] that would be unwelcome
and disagreeable to others,' then say to him: 'Then, venerable sir,
why have you declared of Devadatta: "Devadatta is destined for
the states of deprivation, Devadatta is destined for hell, Devadatta
will remain [in hell] for the aeon, Devadatta is incorrigible"?
Devadatta was angry and dissatisfied with that speech of yours.'
When the recluse Gotama is posed this two-homed question by
you, he will not be able either to gulp it down or to throw it up. If
an iron spike were stuck in a man's throat, he would not be able
either to gulp it down or to throw it up; so too, prince, when the


498


i 394


To Prince Abhaya 499


recluse Gotama is posed this two-homed question by you, he will
not be able either to gulp it down or to throw it up."

4. "Yes, venerable sir," Prince Abhaya replied. Then he rose
from his seat, and after paying homage to the Nigantha Nata-
putta, keeping him on his right, he left and went to the Blessed
One. After paying homage to the Blessed One, he sat down at
one side, looked at the sun, and thought: "It is too late today to
refute the Blessed One's doctrine. I shall refute the Blessed One's
doctrine in my own house tomorrow." Then he said to the Bles-
sed One: "Venerable sir, let the Blessed One with three others
consent to accept tomorrow's meal from me." The Blessed One
consented in silence.

5. Then, knowing that the Blessed One had consented. Prince
Abhaya rose from his seat, and after paying homage to him,
keeping him on his right, he departed. Then, when the night had
ended, it being morning, the Blessed One dressed, and taking
his bowl and outer robe, he went to Prince Abhaya's house and
sat down on the seat made ready. Then, with his own hands.
Prince Abhaya served and satisfied the Blessed One with vari-
ous kinds of good food. When the Blessed One had eaten and
had withdrawn his hand from the bowl, Prince Abhaya took a
low seat, sat down at one side, and said to the Blessed One:

6. "Venerable sir, would a Tathagata utter such speech as
would be unwelcome and disagreeable to others?"

"There is no one-sided answer to that, prince."

"Then, venerable sir, the Niganthas have lost in this."

"Why do you say this, prince: [394] 'Then, venerable sir, the
Niganthas have lost in this'?" 612

Prince Abhaya then reported to the Blessed One his entire
conversation with the Nigantha Nataputta.

7. Now on that occasion a young tender infant was lying
prone on Prince Abhaya's lap. Then the Blessed One said to
Prince Abhaya: [395] "What do you think, prince? If, while you
or your nurse were not attending to him, this child were to put a
stick or a pebble in his mouth, what would you do to him?"

"Venerable sir, I would take it out. If I could not take it out at
once, I would take his head in my left hand, and crooking a finger
of my right hand, I would take it out even if it meant drawing
blood. Why is that? Because I have compassion for the child."


500 Abhayarajakumara Sutta: Sutta 58


1396


8. "So too, prince, such speech as the Tathagata knows to be
untrue, incorrect, and unbeneficial, and which is also unwel-
come and disagreeable to others: such speech the Tathagata
does not utter. Such speech as the Tathagata knows to be true
and correct but unbeneficial, and which is also unwelcome and
disagreeable to others: such speech the Tathagata does not utter.
Such speech as the Tathagata knows to be true, correct, and ben-
eficial, but which is unwelcome and disagreeable to others: the
Tathagata knows the time to use such speech. 613 Such speech as
the Tathagata knows to be untrue, incorrect, and unbeneficial,
but which is welcome and agreeable to others: such speech the
Tathagata does not utter. Such speech as the Tathagata knows to
be true and correct but unbeneficial, and which is welcome and
agreeable to others: such speech the Tathagata does not utter.
Such speech as the Tathagata knows to be true, correct, and ben-
eficial, and which is welcome and agreeable to others: the
Tathagata knows the time to use such speech. Why is that?
Because the Tathagata has compassion for beings."

9. "Venerable sir, when learned nobles, learned brahmins,
learned householders, and learned recluses, after formulating a
question, then go to the Blessed One and pose it, has there
already been in the Blessed One's mind the thought: 'If they
come to me and ask me thus, I shall answer thus'? Or does that
answer occur to the Tathagata on the spot?"

10. "As to that, prince, I shall ask you a question in return.
Answer it as you choose. What do you think, prince? Are you
skilled in the parts of a chariot?"

"Yes, venerable sir, I am."

"What do you think, prince? When people come to you and
ask: 'What is the name of this part of the chariot?' has there
already been in your mind the thought: [396] 'If they come to me
and ask me thus, I shall answer them thus'? Or does that answer
occur to you on the spot?"

"Venerable sir, I am well known as a charioteer skilled in the
parts of a chariot. All the parts of a chariot are well known to
me. That answer would occur to me on the spot."

11. "So too, prince, when learned nobles, learned brahmins,
learned householders, and learned recluses, after formulating a
question, then come to the Tathagata and pose it, the answer
occurs to the Tathagata on the spot. Why is that? That element


i 396


To Prince Abhaya 501


of things has been fully penetrated by the Tathagata, through
the full penetration of which the answer occurs to the Tathagata
on the spot." 614

12. When this was said. Prince Abhaya said: "Magnificent,
venerable sir! Magnificent, venerable sir! The Blessed One has
made the Dhamma clear in many ways... From today let the
Blessed One remember me as a lay follower who has gone to
him for refuge for life."


59 Bahuvedaniya Sutta
The Many Kinds of Feeling


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Savattfu in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.

2. Then the carpenter Pancakanga 615 went to the venerable
Udayin, and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one
side and asked him:

3. "Venerable sir, how many kinds of feeling have been stated
by the Blessed One?"

"Three kinds of feeling have been stated by the Blessed One,
householder: pleasant feeling, painful feeling, and neither-
painful-nor-pleasant feeling. [397] These three kinds of feeling
have been stated by the Blessed One."

"Not three kinds of feeling have been stated by the Blessed
One, venerable Udayin; two kinds of feeling have been stated
by the Blessed One: pleasant feeling and painful feeling. This
neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling has been stated by the
Blessed One as a peaceful and sublime kind of pleasure."

A second time and a third time the venerable Udayin stated
his position, and a second time and a third time the carpenter
Pancakanga stated his. But the venerable Udayin could not con-
vince the carpenter Pancakanga nor could the carpenter
Pancakanga convince the venerable Udayin.

4. The venerable Ananda heard their conversation. Then he
went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat
down at one side and reported to the Blessed One the entire
conversation between the venerable Udayin and the carpenter
Pancakanga. When he had finished, the Blessed One told the
venerable Ananda:

5. "Ananda, it was actually a true presentation that the car-
penter Pancakanga would not accept from Udayin, and it was
actually a true presentation that Udayin would not accept from


502


i 399


The Many Kinds of Feeling 503


the carpenter Pancakanga. I have stated two kinds of feeling in
one presentation; [398] I have stated three kinds of feeling in
another presentation; I have stated five kinds of feeling in
another presentation; I have stated six kinds of feeling in another
presentation; I have stated eighteen kinds of feeling in another
presentation; I have stated thirty-six kinds of feeling in another
presentation; I have stated one hundred and eight kinds of feel-
ing in another presentation. 616 That is how the Dhamma has
been shown by me in [different] presentations.

"When the Dhamma has thus been shown by me in [different]
presentations, it may be expected of those who will not concede,
allow, and accept what is well stated and well spoken by others
that they will take to quarreling, brawling, and disputing, stab-
bing each other with verbal daggers. But it may be expected of
those who concede, allow, and accept what is well stated and
well spoken by others that they will live in concord, with mutu-
al appreciation, without disputing, blending like milk and
water, viewing each other with kindly eyes.

6. "Ananda, there are these five cords of sensual pleasure.
What are the five? Forms cognizable by the eye that are wished
for, desired, agreeable, and likeable, connected with sensual
desire and provocative of lust. Sounds cognizable by the ear...
Odours cognizable by the nose... Flavours cognizable by the
tongue... Tangibles cognizable by the body that are wished for,
desired, agreeable, and likeable, connected with sensual desire
and provocative of lust. These are the five cords of sensual plea-
sure. Now the pleasure and joy that arise dependent on these
five cords of sensual pleasure are called sensual pleasure.

7. "Should anyone say: 'That is the utmost pleasure and joy
that beings experience,' I would not concede that to him. Why is
that? Because there is another kind of pleasure loftier and more
sublime than that pleasure. And what is that other kind of plea-
sure? Here, Ananda, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and
abides in the first jhana, which is accompanied by applied and
sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.
This is that other kind of pleasure loftier and more sublime than
the previous pleasure.

8. "Should anyone say: 'That is the utmost pleasure and joy
that beings experience,' I would not concede that to him. [399]


504 Bahuvedamya Sutta: Sutta 59


i 399


Why is that? Because there is another kind of pleasure loftier
and more sublime than that pleasure. And what is that other
kind of pleasure? Here, Ananda, with the stilling of applied and
sustained thought, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the sec-
ond jhana, which has self-confidence and singleness of mind
without applied and sustained thought, with rapture and plea-
sure born of concentration. This is that other kind of pleasure
loftier and more sublime than the previous pleasure.

9. "Should anyone say... And what is that other kind of plea-
sure? Here, Ananda, with the fading away as well of rapture, a
bhikkhu abides in equanimity, mindful and fully aware, and
still feeling pleasure with the body, he enters upon and abides in
the third jhana, on account of which noble ones announce: 'He
has a pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.' This
is that other kind of pleasure loftier and more sublime than the
previous pleasure.

10. "Should anyone say... And what is that other kind of plea-
sure? Here, Ananda, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain,
and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, a bhikkhu
enters upon and abides in the fourth jhana, which has neither-
pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.
This is that other kind of pleasure loftier and more sublime than
the previous pleasure. 617

11. "Should anyone say... And what is that other kind of
pleasure? Here, Ananda, with the complete surmounting of
perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of
sensory impact, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity,
aware that 'space is infinite,' a bhikkhu enters upon and abides
in the base of infinite space. This is that other kind of pleasure
loftier and more sublime than the previous pleasure.

12. "Should anyone say. ..And what is that other kind of
pleasure? Here, Ananda, by completely surmounting the base
of infinite space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite,' a
bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of infinite con-
sciousness. This is that other kind of pleasure loftier and more
sublime than the previous pleasure.

13. "Should anyone say... And what is that other kind of
pleasure? Here, Ananda, by completely surmounting the base
of infinite consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing,' a
bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of nothingness.


i 400


The Many Kinds of Feeling 505


This is that other kind of pleasure loftier and more sublime than
the previous pleasure. [400]

14. "Should anyone say... And what is that other kind of plea-
sure? Here, Ananda, by completely surmounting the base of
nothingness, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of
neither-perception-nor-non-perception. This is that other kind of
pleasure loftier and more sublime than the previous pleasure.

15. "Should anyone say: 'That is the utmost pleasure and joy
that beings experience/ I would not concede that to him. Why is
that? Because there is another kind of pleasure loftier and more
sublime than that pleasure. And what is that other kind of plea-
sure? Here, Ananda, by completely surmounting the base of
neither-perception-nor-non-perception, a bhikkhu enters upon
and abides in the cessation of perception and feeling. This is that
other kind of pleasure loftier and more sublime than the previ-
ous pleasure.

16. "It is possible, Ananda, that wanderers of other sects might
speak thus: 'The recluse Gotama speaks of the cessation of per-
ception and feeling and he describes that as pleasure. What is
this, and how is this?' Wanderers of other sects who speak thus
should be told: 'Friends, the Blessed One describes pleasure not
only with reference to pleasant feeling; rather, friends, the
Tathagata describes as pleasure any kind of pleasure wherever
and in whatever way it is found.'" 618

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Ananda was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.



60 Apannaka Sutta


The Incontrovertible Teaching


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was
wandering in the Kosalan country with a large Sangha of
bhikkhus, and eventually he arrived at a Kosalan brahmin vil-
lage named Sala.

2. The brahmin householders of Sala heard: "The recluse
Gotama, the son of the Sakyans who went forth from a Sakyan
clan, has been wandering in the Kosalan country [401] with a
large Sangha of bhikkhus and has come to Sala. Now a good
report of Master Gotama has been spread to this effect: 'That
Blessed One is accomplished, fully enlightened, perfect in true
knowledge and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incompara-
ble leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans,
enlightened, blessed. He declares this world with its gods, its
Maras, and its Brahmas, this generation with its recluses and
brahmins, its princes and its people, which he has himself
realised with direct knowledge. He teaches the Dhamma good in
the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, with the
right meaning and phrasing, and he reveals a holy life that is
utterly perfect and pure.' Now it is good to see such arahants."

3. Then the brahmin householders of Sala went to the Blessed
One. Some paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down at one
side; some exchanged greetings with him, and when this courte-
ous and amiable talk was finished, sat down at one side; some
extended their hands in reverential salutation towards the
Blessed One and sat down at one side; some pronounced their
name and clan in the Blessed One's presence and sat down at
one side; some kept silent and sat down at one side.

4. When they were seated, the Blessed One asked them:
"Householders, is there any teacher agreeable to you in whom
you have acquired faith supported by reasons?" 619


506


The Incontrovertible Teaching 507


"No, venerable sir, there is no teacher agreeable to us in
whom we have acquired faith supported by reasons."

"Since, householders, you have not found an agreeable
teacher, you may undertake and practise this incontrovertible
teaching; 620 for when the incontrovertible teaching is accepted
and undertaken, it will lead to your welfare and happiness for a
long time. And what is the incontrovertible teaching? 621

(I. THE DOCTRINE OF NIHILISM)

5. (A) "Householders, there are some recluses and brahmins
whose doctrine and view is this: 'There is nothing given, noth-
ing offered, nothing sacrificed; no fruit or result of good and bad
actions; no this world, no other world; no mother, no father; no
beings who are reborn spontaneously; no good and virtuous
recluses and brahmins in the world who have themselves
realised by direct knowledge and declare this world and the
other world.' 622 [402]

6. (B) "Now there are some recluses and brahmins whose doc-
trine is directly opposed to that of those recluses and brahmins,
and they say thus: 'There is what is given and what is offered
and what is sacrificed; there is fruit and result of good and bad
actions; there is this world and the other world; there is mother
and father; there are beings who are reborn spontaneously; there
are good and virtuous recluses and brahmins in the world who
have themselves realised by direct knowledge and declare this
world and the other world.' What do you think, householders?
Don't these recluses and brahmins hold doctrines directly
opposed to each other?" - "Yes, venerable sir."

7. (A.i) "Now, householders, of those recluses and brahmins
whose doctrine and view is this: 'There is nothing given... no
good and virtuous recluses and brahmins in the world who
have themselves realised by direct knowledge and declare this
world and the other world,' it is to be expected that they will
avoid these three wholesome states, namely, good bodily con-
duct, good verbal conduct, and good mental conduct, and that
they will undertake and practise these three unwholesome
states, namely, bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, and
mental misconduct. Why is that? Because those good recluses
and brahmins do not see in unwholesome states the danger.


508 Apannaka Sutta: Sutta 60


i 403


degradation, and defilement, nor do they see in wholesome
states the blessing of renunciation, the aspect of cleansing.

8. (A.ii) "Since there actually is another world, one who holds
the view 'there is no other world' has wrong view. Since there
actually is another world, one who intends 'there is no other
world' has wrong intention. Since there actually is another
world, one who makes the statement 'there is no other world'
has wrong speech. Since there actually is another world, one
who says 'there is no other world' is opposed to those arahants
who know the other world. Since there actually is another
world, one who convinces another 'there is no other world'
convinces him to accept an untrue Dhamma; and because he
convinces another to accept an untrue Dhamma, he praises
himself and disparages others. Thus any pure virtue that he for-
merly had is abandoned and corrupt conduct is substituted. 623
And this wrong view, wrong intention, wrong speech, opposi-
tion to noble ones, convincing another to accept an untrue
Dhamma, and self-praise and disparagement of others - these
several evil unwholesome states thus come into being with
wrong view as their condition. [403]

9. (A.iii) "About this a wise man considers thus: 'If there is no
other world, then on the dissolution of the body this good per-
son will have made himself safe enough. 624 But if there is another
world, then on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will
reappear in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in
perdition, even in hell. Now whether or not the word of those
good recluses and brahmins is true, let me assume that there is
no other world: still this good person is here and now censured
by the wise as an immoral person, one of wrong view who holds
the doctrine of nihilism. 625 But on the other hand, if there is
another world, then this good person has made an unlucky
throw on both counts: since he is censured by the wise here and
now, and since on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will
reappear in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in
perdition, even in hell. He has wrongly accepted and undertaken
this incontrovertible teaching in such a way that it extends only
to one side and excludes the wholesome alternative.' 626

10. (B.i) "Now, householders, of those recluses and brahmins
whose doctrine and view is this: 'There is what is given... there
are good and virtuous recluses and brahmins in the world who


i 404


The Incontrovertible Teaching 509


have themselves realised by direct knowledge and declare this
world and the other world,' it is to be expected that they will
avoid these three unwholesome states, namely, bodily miscon-
duct, verbal misconduct, and mental misconduct, and that they
will undertake and practise these three wholesome states,
namely, good bodily conduct, good verbal conduct, and good
mental conduct. Why is that? Because those good recluses and
brahmins see in unwholesome states the danger, degradation,
and defilement, and they see in wholesome states the blessing of
renunciation, the aspect of cleansing.

11. (B.ii) "Since there actually is another world, one who holds
the view 'there is another world' has right view. Since there
actually is another world, one who intends 'there is another
world' has right intention. Since there actually is another world,
one who makes the statement 'there is another world' has right
speech. Since there actually is another world, one who says
'there is another world' is not opposed to those arahants who
know the other world. Since there actually is another world, one
who convinces another 'there is another world' [404] convinces
him to accept true Dhamma; and because he convinces another
to accept true Dhamma, he does not praise himself and dispar-
age others. Thus any corrupt conduct that he formerly had is
abandoned and pure virtue is substituted. And this right view,
right intention, right speech, non-opposition to noble ones, con-
vincing another to accept true Dhamma, and avoidance of self-
praise and disparagement of others - these several wholesome
states thus come into being with right view as their condition.

12. (B.iii) "About this a wise man considers thus: 'If there is
another world, then on the dissolution of the body, after death,
this good person will reappear in a happy destination, even in
the heavenly world. Now whether or not the word of those
good recluses and brahmins is true, let me assume that there is
no other world: still this good person is here and now praised
by the wise as a virtuous person, one with right view who holds
the doctrine of affirmation. 627 And on the other hand, if there is
another world, then this good person has made a lucky throw
on both counts: since he is praised by the wise here and now,
and since on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will
reappear in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.
He has rightly accepted and undertaken this incontrovertible


i 405


510 Apannaka Sutta: Sutta 60


teaching in such a way that it extends to both sides and excludes
the unwholesome alternative.' 628

(D. THE DOCTRINE OF NON-DOING)

13. (A) "Householders, there are some recluses and brahmins
whose doctrine and view is this: 629 'When one acts or makes
others act, when one mutilates or makes others mutilate, when
one tortures or makes others inflict torture, when one inflicts
sorrow or makes others inflict sorrow, when one oppresses or
makes others inflict oppression, when one intimidates or makes
others inflict intimidation, when one kills living beings, takes
what is not given, breaks into houses, plunders wealth, com-
mits burglary, ambushes highways, seduces another's wife,
utters falsehood - no evil is done by the doer. If, with a razor-
rimmed wheel, one were to make the living beings on this earth
into one mass of flesh, into one heap of flesh, because of this
there would be no evil and no outcome of evil. If one were to go
along the south bank of the Ganges killing and slaughtering,
mutilating and making others mutilate, torturing and making
others inflict torture, because of this there would be no evil and
no outcome of evil. If one were to go along the north bank of
the Ganges giving gifts and making others give gifts, making
offerings and making others make offerings, because of this
there would be no merit and no outcome of merit. By giving, by
taming oneself, by restraint, by speaking truth, there is no merit
and no outcome of merit.'

14. (B) "Now there are some recluses and brahmins [405]
whose doctrine is directly opposed to that of those recluses and
brahmins, and they say thus: 'When one acts or makes others
act, when one mutilates or makes others mutilate... utters false-
hood - evil is done by the doer. If, with a razor-rimmed wheel,
one were to make the living beings on this earth into one mass
of flesh, into one heap of flesh, because of this there would be
evil and the outcome of evil. If one were to go along the south
bank of the Ganges killing and slaughtering, mutilating and
making others mutilate, torturing and making others inflict tor-
ture, because of this there would be evil and the outcome of
evil. If one were to go along the north bank of the Ganges giv-
ing gifts and making others give gifts, making offerings and


i 406


The Incontrovertible Teaching 511


making others make offerings, because of this there would be
merit and the outcome of merit. By giving, by taming oneself, by
restraint, by speaking truth, there is merit and the outcome of
merit/ What do you think, householders? Don't these recluses
and brahmins hold doctrines directly opposed to each other?" -
"Yes, venerable sir."

15. (A.i) "Now, householders, of those recluses and brahmins
whose doctrine and view is this: 'When one acts or makes others
act. . .there is no merit and no outcome of merit,' it is to be expect-
ed that they will avoid these three wholesome states, namely,
good bodily conduct, good verbal conduct and good mental con-
duct, and that they will undertake and practise these three
unwholesome states, namely, bodily misconduct, verbal miscon-
duct, and mental misconduct. Why is that? Because those good
recluses and brahmins do not see in unwholesome states the
danger, degradation, and defilement, nor do they see in whole-
some states the blessing of renunciation, the aspect of cleansing.

16. (A.ii) "Since there actually is doing, one who holds the
view 'there is no doing' has wrong view. Since there actually is
doing, one who intends ‘there is no doing’ has wrong intention.
Since there actually is doing, one who makes the statement
'there is no doing' has wrong speech. Since there actually is
doing, one who says 'there is no doing' is opposed to those ara-
hants who hold the doctrine that there is doing. Since there
actually is doing, one who convinces another 'there is no doing'
convinces him to accept an untrue Dhamma; and because he
convinces another to accept an untrue Dhamma, he praises
himself and disparages others. Thus any pure virtue that he for-
merly had is abandoned and corrupt conduct is substituted.
[406] And this wrong view, wrong intention, wrong speech,
opposition to noble ones, convincing another to accept an
untrue Dhamma, and self-praise and disparagement of others -
these several evil unwholesome states thus come into being with
wrong view as their condition.

17. (A.iii) "About this a wise man considers thus: 'If there is no
doing, then on the dissolution of the body this good person will
have made himself safe enough. But if there is doing, then on the
dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear in a state of
deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in
hell. Now whether or not the word of those good recluses and


i 407


512 Apannaka Sutta: Sutta 60


brahmins is true, let me assume that there is no doing: still this
good person is here and now censured by the wise as an
immoral person, one of wrong view who holds the doctrine of
non-doing. But on the other hand, if there is doing, then this
good person has made an unlucky throw on both counts: since
he is censured by the wise here and now, and since on the disso-
lution of the body, after death, he will reappear in a state of
deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in
hell. He has wrongly accepted and undertaken this incontrovert-
ible teaching in such a way that it extends only to one side and
excludes the wholesome alternative/

18. (B.i) "Now, householders, of those recluses and brahmins
whose doctrine and view is this: 'When one acts or makes others
act... there is merit and outcome of merit/ it is to be expected
that they will avoid these three unwholesome states, namely,
bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, and mental misconduct,
and that they will undertake and practise these three whole-
some states, namely, good bodily conduct, good verbal conduct,
and good mental conduct. Why is that? Because those good
recluses and brahmins see in unwholesome states the danger,
degradation, and defilement, and they see in wholesome states
the blessing of renunciation, the aspect of cleansing.

19. (B.ii) "Since there actually is doing, one who holds the
view 'there is doing' has right view. Since there actually is
doing, one who intends 'there is doing' has right intention. Since
there actually is doing, one who makes the statement 'there is
doing' has right speech. Since there actually is doing, one who
says 'there is doing' is not opposed to those arahants who hold
the doctrine that there is doing. Since there actually is doing,
one who convinces another 'there is doing' convinces him to
accept true Dhamma; [407] and because he convinces another to
accept true Dhamma, he does not praise himself and disparage
others. Thus any corrupt conduct that he formerly had is aban-
doned and pure virtue is substituted. And this right view, right
intention, right speech, non-opposition to noble ones, convinc-
ing another to accept true Dhamma, and avoidance of self-praise
and disparagement of others - these several wholesome states
thus come into being with right view as their condition.

20. (B.iii) "About this a wise man considers thus: 'If there is
doing, then on the dissolution of the body, after death, this good


i 408


The Incontrovertible Teaching 513


person will reappear in a happy destination, even in the heavenly
world. Now whether or not the word of those good recluses and
brahmins is true, let me assume that there is no doing: still this
good person is here and now praised by the wise as a virtuous
person, one with right view who holds the doctrine of doing.
And on the other hand, if there is doing, then this good person
has made a lucky throw on both counts: since he is praised by
the wise here and now, and since on the dissolution of the body,
after death, he will reappear in a happy destination, even in the
heavenly world. He has rightly accepted and undertaken this
incontrovertible teaching in such a way that it extends to both
sides and excludes the unwholesome alternative.'

(ill. THE DOCTRINE OF NON-CAUSALITY)

21. (A) "Householders, there are some recluses and brahmins
whose doctrine and view is this: 630 'There is no cause or condi-
tion for the defilement of beings; beings are defiled without
cause or condition. There is no cause or condition for the purifi-
cation of beings; beings are purified without cause or condition.
There is no power, no energy, no manly strength, no manly
endurance. All beings, all living things, all creatures, all souls
are without mastery, power, and energy; moulded by destiny,
circumstance, and nature, they experience pleasure and pain in
the six classes.' 631

22. (B) "Now there are some recluses and brahmins whose
doctrine is directly opposed to that of those recluses and brah-
mins, and they say thus: "There is a cause and condition for the
defilement of beings; beings are defiled owing to a cause and
condition. There is a cause and condition for the purification of
beings; beings are purified owing to a cause and condition.
There is power, energy, manly strength, manly endurance. It is
not the case that all beings, all living things, all creatures, all
souls are without mastery, power, and energy, or that moulded
by destiny, circumstance, and nature, they experience pleasure
and pain in the six classes.' What do you think, householders?
[408] Don't these recluses and brahmins hold doctrines directly
opposed to each other?" - "Yes, venerable sir."

23. (A.i) "Now, householders, of those recluses and brahmins
whose doctrine and view is this: 'There is no cause or condition


i 409



514 Apannaka Sutta: Sutta 60

for the defilement of beings... they experience pleasure and
pain in the six classes/ it is to be expected that they will avoid
these three wholesome states, namely, good bodily conduct,
good verbal conduct, and good mental conduct, and that they
will undertake and practise these three unwholesome states,
namely, bodily misconduct, verbal misconduct, and mental
misconduct. Why is that? Because those good recluses and
brahmins do not see in unwholesome states the danger, degra-
dation, and defilement, nor do they see in wholesome states the
blessing of renunciation, the aspect of cleansing.

24. (A.ii) "Since there actually is causality, one who holds the
view 'there is no causality' has wrong view. Since there actually
is causality, one who intends 'there is no causality' has wrong
intention. Since there actually is causality, one who makes the
statement 'there is no causality' has wrong speech. Since there
actually is causality, one who says 'there is no causality' is
opposed to those arahants who hold the doctrine of causality.
Since there actually is causality, one who convinces another
'there is no causality' convinces him to accept an untrue
Dhamma; and because he convinces another to accept an untrue
Dhamma, he praises himself and disparages others. Thus any
pure virtue that he formerly had is abandoned and corrupt con-
duct is substituted. And this wrong view, wrong intention,
wrong speech, opposition to noble ones, convincing another to
accept an untrue Dhamma, and self-praise and disparagement
of others - these several evil unwholesome states thus come into
being with wrong view as their condition.

25. (A.iii) "About this a wise man considers thus: 'If there is no
causality, then on the dissolution of the body this good person
will have made himself safe enough. But if there is causality,
then on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear
in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdi-
tion, even in hell. Now whether or not the word of those good
recluses and brahmins is true, let me assume that there is no
causality: still this good person is here and now censured by the
wise as an immoral person, one of wrong view who holds the
doctrine of non-causality. But on the other hand, if there is
causality, then this good person has made an unlucky throw on
both counts: [409] since he is censured by the wise here and
now, and since on the dissolution of the body, after death, he


i 409


The Incontrovertible Teaching 515


will reappear in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination,
in perdition, even in hell. He has wrongly accepted and under-
taken this incontrovertible teaching in such a way that it extends
only to one side and excludes the wholesome alternative.'

26. (B.i) "Now, householders, of those recluses and brahmins
whose doctrine and view is this: 'There is a cause and condition
for the defilement of beings... they experience pleasure and pain
in the six classes/ it is to be expected that they will avoid these
three unwholesome states, namely, bodily misconduct, verbal
misconduct, and mental misconduct, and that they will under-
take and practise these three wholesome states, namely, good
bodily conduct, good verbal conduct, and good mental conduct.
Why is that? Because those good recluses and brahmins see in
unwholesome states the danger, degradation, and defilement,
and they see in wholesome states the blessing of renunciation,
the aspect of cleansing.

27. (B.ii) "Since there actually is causality, one who holds the
view 'there is causality' has right view. Since there actually is
causality, one who intends 'there is causality' has right intention.
Since there actually is causality, one who makes the statement
'there is causality' has right speech. Since there actually is
causality, one who says 'there is causality' is not opposed to
those arahants who hold the doctrine of causality. Since there
actually is causality, one who convinces another 'there is
causality' convinces him to accept true Dhamma; and because
he convinces another to accept true Dhamma, he does not praise
himself and disparage others. Thus any corrupt conduct that he
formerly had is abandoned and pure virtue is substituted. And
this right view, right intention, right speech, non-opposition to
noble ones, convincing another to accept true Dhamma, and
avoidance of self-praise and disparagement of others - these
several wholesome states thus come into being with right view
as their condition.

28. (B.iii) "About this a wise man considers thus: 'If there is
causality, then on the dissolution of the body, after death, this
good person will reappear in a happy destination, even in the
heavenly world. Now whether or not the word of those good
recluses and brahmins is true, let me assume that there is no
causality: still this good person is here and now praised by the
wise as a virtuous person, one with right view who holds the


i 410


516 Apannaka Sutta: Sutta 60


doctrine of causality. And on the other hand, if there is [410]
causality, then this good person has made a lucky throw on both
counts: since he is praised by the wise here and now, and since
on the dissolution of the body, after death, he will reappear in a
happy destination, even in the heavenly world. He has rightly
accepted and undertaken this incontrovertible teaching in such a
way that it extends to both sides and excludes the unwholesome
alternative.'

(IV. THERE ARE NO IMMATERIAL REALMS)

29. "Householders, there are some recluses and brahmins
whose doctrine and view is this: 'There are definitely no imma-
terial realms.' 632

30. "Now there are some recluses and brahmins whose doc-
trine is directly opposed to that of those recluses and brahmins,
and they say thus: 'There definitely are immaterial realms.'
What do you think, householders? Don't these recluses and
brahmins hold doctrines directly opposed to each other?" -
"Yes, venerable sir."

31. "About this a wise man considers thus: "These good recluses
and brahmins hold the doctrine and view "there are definitely
no immaterial realms," but that has not been seen by me. And
these other good recluses and brahmins hold the doctrine and
view "there definitely are immaterial realms," but that has not
been known by me. If, without knowing and seeing, I were to
take one side and declare: "Only this is true, anything else is
wrong," that would not be fitting for me. Now as to the recluses
and brahmins who hold the doctrine and view "there definitely
are no immaterial realms," if their word is true then it is certainly
still possible that I might reappear [after death] among the gods
of the fine-material realms who consist of mind. 633 But as to the
recluses and brahmins who hold the doctrine and view "there
definitely are immaterial realms," if their word is true then it is
certainly possible that I might reappear [after death] among the
gods of the immaterial realms who consist of perception. The
taking up of rods and weapons, quarrels, brawls, disputes,
recrimination, malice, and false speech are seen to occur based
on material form, but this does not exist at all in the immaterial
realms.' After reflecting thus, he practises the way to dispassion


i 411


The Incontrovertible Teaching 517


towards material forms, to the fading away and cessation of
material forms. 634

(V. THERE IS NO CESSATION OF BEING)

32. "Householders, there are some recluses and brahmins
whose doctrine and view is this: 'There is definitely no cessation
of being.' 635

33. "Now there are some recluses and brahmins whose doc-
trine is directly opposed to that of those recluses and brahmins,
and they say thus: 'There definitely [411] is a cessation of being.'
What do you think, householders? Don't these recluses and
brahmins hold doctrines directly opposed to each other?" -
"Yes, venerable sir."

34. "About this a wise man considers thus: 'These good recluses
and brahmins hold the doctrine and view "there is definitely no
cessation of being," but that has not been seen by me. And these
other good recluses and brahmins hold the doctrine and view
"there definitely is a cessation of being," but that has not been
known by me. If, without knowing and seeing, I were to take
one side and declare: "Only this is true, anything else is wrong,"
that would not be fitting for me. Now as to the recluses and
brahmins who hold the doctrine and view "there definitely is no
cessation of being," if their word is true then it is certainly still
possible that I might reappear [after death] among the gods of
the immaterial realms who consist of perception. But as to the
recluses and brahmins who hold the doctrine and view "there
definitely is a cessation of being," if their word is true then it is
possible that I might here and now attain final Nibbana. The
view of those good recluses and brahmins who hold the doc-
trine and view "there definitely is no cessation of being" is close
to lust, close to bondage, close to delighting, close to holding,
close to clinging; but the view of those good recluses and brah-
mins who hold the doctrine and view "there definitely is cessation
of being" is close to non-lust, close to non-bondage, close to non-
delighting, close to non-holding, close to non-clinging. After
reflecting thus, he practises the way to dispassion towards
being, to the fading away and cessation of being. 636


518 Apannaka Sutta: Sutta 60


i 412


(four kinds of persons)

35. "Householders, there are four kinds of persons to be found
existing in the world. What four? Here a certain kind of person
torments himself and pursues the practice of torturing himself.
Here a certain kind of person torments others and pursues the
practice of torturing others. Here a certain kind of person tor-
ments himself and pursues the practice of torturing himself, and
he also torments others and pursues the practice of torturing
others. Here a certain kind of person does not torment himself
or pursue the practice of torturing himself, and he does not tor-
ment others or pursue the practice of torturing others. [412]
Since he torments neither himself nor others, he is here and now
hungerless, extinguished, and cooled, and he abides experienc-
ing bliss, having himself become holy.

36. "What kind of person, householders, torments himself
and pursues the practice of torturing himself? Here a certain
person goes naked, rejecting conventions. ..(os Sutta 51,
§8 )... Thus in such a variety of ways he dwells pursuing the
practice of tormenting and mortifying the body. This is called
the kind of person who torments himself and pursues the prac-
tice of torturing himself.

37. "What kind of person, householders, torments others and
pursues the practice of torturing others? Here a certain person is
a butcher of sheep... (as Sutta 51, §9)... or one who follows any
other such bloody occupation. This is called the kind of person
who torments others and pursues the practice of torturing others.

38. "What kind of a person, householders, torments himself
and pursues the practice of torturing himself and also torments
others and pursues the practice of torturing others? Here some
person is a head-anointed noble king or a well-to-do brahmin...
(as Sutta 51, §10 )... And then his slaves, messengers, and ser-
vants make preparations, weeping with tearful faces, being
spurred on by threats of punishment and by fear. This is called
the kind of person who torments himself and pursues the prac-
tice of torturing himself and who torments others and pursues
the practice of torturing others.

39. "What kind of person, householders, does not torment
himself or pursue the practice of torturing himself and does not
torment others or pursue the practice of torturing others - the


i 413


The Incontrovertible Teaching 519


one who, since he torments neither himself nor others, is here
and now hungerless, extinguished, and cooled, and abides expe-
riencing bliss, having himself become holy?

40-55. "Here, householders, a Tathagata appears in the
world... (as Sutta 51, §§12-27) [413]... He understands: 'Birth is
destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has
been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.'

56. "This, householders, is called the kind of person who does
not torment himself or pursue the practice of torturing himself
and who does not torment others or pursue the practice of tortur-
ing others - the one who, since he torments neither himself nor
others, is here and how hungerless, extinguished, and cooled,
and abides experiencing bliss, having himself become holy."

57. When this was said, the brahmin householders of Sala said
to the Blessed One: "Magnificent, Master Gotama! Magnificent,
Master Gotama! Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in
many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been
overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to
one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the darkness for
those with eyesight to see forms. We go to Master Gotama for
refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus. From
today let Master Gotama accept us as lay followers who have
gone to him for refuge for life."




2

The Division on Bhikkhus

( Bhikkhuvagga )




61 Ambalatthikarahulovada Sutta
Advice to Rahula at Ambalatthika


[414] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One
was living at Rajagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels'
Sanctuary.

2. Now on that occasion the venerable Rahula was living at
Ambalatthika. 637 Then, when it was evening, the Blessed One
rose from meditation and went to the venerable Rahula at
Ambalatthika. The venerable Rahula saw the Blessed One com-
ing in the distance and made a seat ready and set out water for
washing the feet. The Blessed One sat down on the seat made
ready and washed his feet. The venerable Rahula paid homage
to him and sat down at one side.

3. Then the Blessed One left a little water in the water vessel
and asked the venerable Rahula: "Rahula, do you see this little
water left in the water vessel?" - "Yes, venerable sir." - "Even so
little, Rahula, is the recluseship of those who are not ashamed to
tell a deliberate lie."

4. Then the Blessed One threw away the little water that was
left and asked the venerable Rahula: "Rahula, do you see that
little water that was thrown away?" - "Yes, venerable sir." -
"Even so, Rahula, those who are not ashamed to tell a deliberate
lie have thrown away their recluseship."

5. Then the Blessed One turned the water vessel upside down
and asked the venerable Rahula: "Rahula, do you see this water
vessel turned upside down?" - "Yes, venerable sir." - "Even so,
Rahula, those who are not ashamed to tell a deliberate lie have
turned their recluseship upside down."

6. Then the Blessed One turned the water vessel right way up
again and asked the venerable Rahula: "Rahula, do you see this
hollow, empty water vessel?" - "Yes, venerable sir." - "Even so


523


524 Ambalatthikarahulovada Sutta: Sutta 61 i 416


hollow and empty, Rahula, is the recluseship of those who are
not ashamed to tell a deliberate lie."

7. "Suppose, Rahula, there were a royal tusker elephant with
tusks as long as chariot poles, full-grown in stature, high-bred,
and accustomed to battle. In battle he would perform his task
with his forefeet and his hindfeet, with his forequarters and his
hindquarters, with his head and his ears, with his tusks and his
tail, [415] yet he would keep back his trunk. Then his rider would
think: 'This royal tusker elephant with tusks as long as chariot
poles... performs his task in battle with his forefeet and his hind-
feet... yet he keeps back his trunk. He has not yet given up his
life.' But when the royal tusker elephant... performs his task in
battle with his forefeet and his hindfeet, with his forequarters
and his hindquarters, with his head and his ears, with his tusks
and his tail, and also with his trunk, then his rider would think:
'This royal tusker elephant with tusks as long as chariot
poles... performs his task in battle with his forefeet and his hind-
feet... and also with his trunk. He has given up his life. Now
there is nothing this royal tusker elephant would not do.' So too,
Rahula, when one is not ashamed to tell a deliberate lie, there is
no evil, I say, that one would not do. Therefore, Rahula, you
should train thus: 'I will not utter a falsehood even as a joke.'

8. "What do you think, Rahula? What is the purpose of a mirror?"

"For the purpose of reflection, venerable sir."

"So too, Rahula, an action with the body should be done after
repeated reflection; an action by speech should be done after
repeated reflection; an action by mind should be done after
repeated reflection.

9. "Rahula, when you wish to do an action with the body,
you should reflect upon that same bodily action thus: 'Would
this action that I wish to do with the body lead to my own
affliction, or to the affliction of others, or to the affliction of
both? Is it an unwholesome bodily action with painful conse-
quences, with painful results?' When you reflect, if you know:
'This action that I wish to do with the body would lead to my
own affliction, or to the affliction of others, or to the affliction
of both; it is an unwholesome bodily action with painful conse-
quences, with painful results,' then you definitely should not
do such an action with the body. [416] But when you reflect, if
you know: 'This action that I wish to do with the body would


i 417


Advice to Rahula at Ambalatthika 525


not lead to my own affliction, or to the affliction of others, or to
the affliction of both; it is a wholesome bodily action with
pleasant consequences, with pleasant results/ then you may do
such an action with the body.

10. "Also, Rahula, while you are doing an action with the
body, you should reflect upon that same bodily action thus:
'Does this action that I am doing with the body lead to my own
affliction, or to the affliction of others, or to the affliction of
both? Is it an unwholesome bodily action with painful conse-
quences, with painful results?' When you reflect, if you know:
'This action that I am doing with the body leads to my own
affliction, or to the affliction of others, or to the affliction of both;
it is an unwholesome bodily action with painful consequences,
with painful results/ then you should suspend such a bodily
action. But when you reflect, if you know: 'This action that I am
doing with the body does not lead to my own affliction, or to the
affliction of others, or to the affliction of both; it is a wholesome
bodily action with pleasant consequences, with pleasant results,'
then you may continue in such a bodily action.

11. "Also, Rahula, after you have done an action with the
body, you should reflect upon that same bodily action thus:
'Does this action that I have done with the body lead to my own
affliction, or to the affliction of others, or to the affliction of
both? Was it an unwholesome bodily action with painful conse-
quences, with painful results?' When you reflect, if you know:
'This action that I have done with the body leads to my own
affliction, or to the affliction of others, or to the affliction of both;
it was an unwholesome bodily action with painful conse-
quences, with painful results/ then you should confess such a
bodily action, reveal it, and lay it open to the Teacher or to your
wise companions in the holy life. Having confessed it, revealed
it, and laid it open, [417] you should undertake restraint for the
future. 638 But when you reflect, if you know: 'This action that I
have done with the body does not lead to my own affliction, or
to the affliction of others, or to the affliction of both; it was a
wholesome bodily action with pleasant consequences, pleasant
results/ you can abide happy and glad, training day and night
in wholesome states.

12. "Rahula, when you wish to do an action by speech... {com-
plete as in §9, substituting "speech" for "body"). ..you may do


i 420


526 Ambalatthikarahulovada Sutta: Sutta 61


such an action by speech.

13. "Also, Rahula, while you are doing an action by speech...
(complete as in §10, substituting "speech "for "body") [418]... you
may continue in such an action by speech.

14. "Also, Rahula, after you have done an action by speech. . .
(i complete as in §11, substituting "speech "for "body")... you can
abide happy and glad, training day and night in wholesome
states.

15. "Rahula, when you wish to do an action by mind... (com-
plete as in §9, substituting "mind" for "body") [419]... you may do
such an action by mind.

16. "Also, Rahula, while you are doing an action by mind...
(complete as in §10, substituting "mind "for "body"). ..you may
continue in such a mental action.

17. "Also, Rahula, after you have done an action by mind...
(i complete as in §11, substituting "mind" for "body" 639 )... you can
abide happy and glad, training day and night in wholesome
states. [420]

18. "Rahula, whatever recluses and brahmins in the past puri-
fied their bodily action, their verbal action, and their mental
action, all did so by repeatedly reflecting thus. Whatever recluses
and brahmins in the future will purify their bodily action, their
verbal action, and their mental action, all will do so by repeatedly
reflecting thus. Whatever recluses and brahmins in the present
are purifying their bodily action, their verbal action, and their
mental action, all are doing so by repeatedly reflecting thus.
Therefore, Rahula, you should train thus: 'We will purify our
bodily action, our verbal action, and our mental action by
repeatedly reflecting upon them.'"

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Rahula was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


62 Maharahulovada Sutta
The Greater Discourse of
Advice to Rahula


1. Thus have I heard. 640 On one occasion the Blessed One was
living at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.

2. Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One dressed, and
taking his bowl and outer robe, went into SavatthI for alms. The
venerable Rahula also [421] dressed, and taking his bowl and
outer robe, followed close behind the Blessed One.

3. Then the Blessed One looked back and addressed the
venerable Rahula thus: 641 "Rahula, any kind of material form
whatever, whether past, future, or present, internal or external,
gross or subtle, inferior or superior, far or near, all material form
should be seen as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: This is
not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.'"

"Only material form. Blessed One? Only material form.
Sublime One?"

"Material form, Rahula, and feeling, perception, formations,
and consciousness."

4. Then the venerable Rahula considered thus: "Who would
go into the town for alms today when personally admonished
by the Blessed One?" Thus he turned back and sat down at the
root of a tree, folding his. legs crosswise, setting his body erect,
and establishing mindfulness in front of him.

5. The venerable Sariputta saw him sitting there and
addressed him thus: "Rahula, develop mindfulness of breathing.
When mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated, it
is of great fruit and great benefit." 642

6. Then, when it was evening, the venerable Rahula rose from
meditation and went to the Blessed One. After paying homage
to him, he sat down at one side and asked the Blessed One:

7. "Venerable sir, how is mindfulness of breathing developed
and cultivated, so that it is of great fruit and great benefit?"


527


528 Maharahulovada Sutta: Sutta 62


i 422


(the four great elements)

8. "Rahula, 643 whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is solid,
solidified, and clung-to, that is, head-hairs, body-hairs, nails,
teeth, skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone-marrow, kidneys, heart,
liver, diaphragm, spleen, lungs, large intestines, small intestines,
contents of the stomach, feces, or whatever else internally,
belonging to oneself, is solid, solidified, and clung-to: this is
called the internal earth element. Now both the internal earth
element and the external earth element are simply earth ele-
ment. And that should be seen as it actually is with proper wis-
dom thus: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.'
[422] When one sees it thus as it actually is with proper wisdom,
one becomes disenchanted with the earth element and makes
the mind dispassionate towards the earth element.

9. ''What, Rahula, is the water element? The water element
may be either internal or external. What is the internal water ele-
ment? Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is water,
watery, and clung-to, that is, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat,
tears, grease, spittle, snot, oil-of-the-joints, urine, or whatever
else internally, belonging to oneself, is water, watery, and clung-
to: this is called the internal water element. Now both the inter-
nal water element and the external water element are simply
water element. And that should be seen as it actually is with
proper wisdom thus: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not
my self.' When one sees it thus as it actually is with proper wis-
dom, one becomes disenchanted with the water element and
makes the mind dispassionate towards the water element.

10. "What, Rahula, is the fire element? The fire element may
be either internal or external. What is the internal fire element?
Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is fire, fiery, and
clung-to, that is, that by which one is warmed, ages, and is con-
sumed, and that by which what is eaten, drunk, consumed, and
tasted gets completely digested, or whatever else internally,
belonging to oneself, is fire, fiery, and clung-to: this is called the
internal fire element. Now both the internal fire element and the
external fire element are simply fire element. And that should be
seen as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: 'This is not mine,
this I am not, this is not my self.' When one sees it thus as it


i 423


The Greater Discourse of Advice to Rahula 529


actually is with proper wisdom, one becomes disenchanted with
the fire element and makes the mind dispassionate towards the
fire element.

11. "What, Rahula, is the air element? The air element may be
either internal or external. What is the internal air element?
Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is air, airy, and
clung-to, that is, up-going winds, down-going winds, winds in
the belly, winds in the bowels, winds that course through the
limbs, in-breath and out-breath, or whatever else internally,
belonging to oneself, is air, airy, and clung-to: this is called the
internal air element. Now both the internal air element and the
external air element are simply air element. And that should be
seen as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: 'This is not
mine, this I am not, this is not my self.' [423] When one sees it
thus as it actually is with proper wisdom, one becomes disen-
chanted with the air element and makes the mind dispassionate
towards the air element.

12. "What, Rahula, is the space element? 644 The space element
may be either internal or external. What is the internal space ele-
ment? Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is space, spa-
tial, and clung-to, that is, the holes of the ears, the nostrils, the
door of the mouth, and that [aperture] whereby what is eaten,
drunk, consumed, and tasted gets swallowed, and where it col-
lects, and whereby it is excreted from below, or whatever else
internally, belonging to oneself, is space, spatial, and clung-to:
this is calLed the internal space element. Now both the internal
space element and the external space element are simply space
element. And that should be seen as it actually is with proper
wisdom thus: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.'
When one sees it thus as it actually is with proper wisdom, one
becomes disenchanted with the space element and makes the
mind dispassionate towards the space element.

13. "Rahula, develop meditation that is like the earth; for when
you develop meditation that is like the earth, arisen agreeable
and disagreeable contacts will not invade your mind and
remain. 645 Just as people throw clean things and dirty things,
excrement, urine, spittle, pus, and blood on the earth, and the
earth is not horrified, humiliated, and disgusted because of that,
so too, Rahula, develop meditation that is like the earth; for when



530 Maharahulovada Sutta: Sutta 62


i424


you develop meditation that is like the earth, arisen agreeable
and disagreeable contacts will not invade your mind and remain.

14. "Rahula, develop meditation that is like water; for when
you develop meditation that is like water, arisen agreeable and
disagreeable contacts will not invade your mind and remain.
Just as people wash clean things and dirty things, excrement,
urine, spittle, pus, and blood in water, and the water is not hor-
rified, humiliated, and disgusted because of that, so too, [424]
Rahula, develop meditation that is like water; for when you
develop meditation that is like water, arisen agreeable and dis-
agreeable contacts will not invade your mind and remain.

15. "Rahula, develop meditation that is like fire; for when you
develop meditation that is like fire, arisen agreeable and dis-
agreeable contacts will not invade your mind and remain. Just
as people bum clean things and dirty things, excrement, urine,
spittle, pus, and blood in fire, and the fire is not horrified,
humiliated, and disgusted because of that, so too, Rahula, devel-
op meditation that is like fire; for when you develop meditation
that is like fire, arisen agreeable and disagreeable contacts will
not invade your mind and remain.

16. "Rahula, develop meditation that is like air; for when you
develop meditation that is like air, arisen agreeable and dis-
agreeable contacts will not invade your mind and remain. Just
as the air blows on clean things and dirty things, on excrement,
urine, spittle, pus, and blood, and the air is not horrified, humili-
ated, and disgusted because of that, so too, Rahula, develop
meditation that is like air; for when you develop meditation that
is like air, arisen agreeable and disagreeable contacts will not
invade your mind and remain.

, ’ s% 17. "Rahula, develop meditation that is like space; for when
you develop meditation that is like space, arisen agreeable and
disagreeable contacts will not invade your mind and remain.
Just as space is not established anywhere, so too, Rahula, develop
meditation that is like space; for when you develop meditation
that is like space, arisen agreeable and disagreeable contacts will
not invade your mind and remain.

18. "Rahula, develop meditation on loving-kindness; for when
you develop meditation on loving-kindness, any ill will will be
abandoned.

19. "Rahula, develop meditation on compassion; for when


i 425


The Greater Discourse of Advice to Rahula 531


you develop meditation on compassion, any cruelty will be
abandoned.

20. "Rahula, develop meditation on appreciative joy; for when
you develop meditation on appreciative joy, any discontent will
be abandoned.

21. "Rahula, develop meditation on equanimity; for when
you develop meditation on equanimity, any aversion will be
abandoned.

22. "Rahula, develop meditation on foulness; for when you
develop meditation on foulness, any lust will be abandoned.

23. "Rahula, develop meditation on the perception of imper-
manence; [425] for when you develop meditation on the percep-
tion of impermanence, the conceit 'I am' will be abandoned.

24. "Rahula, develop meditation on mindfulness of breathing.
When mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated, it
is of great fruit and great benefit. And how is mindfulness of
breathing developed and cultivated, so that it is of great fruit
and great benefit?

25. "Here, Rahula, a bhikkhu, gone to the forest or to the root of
a tree or to an empty hut, sits down; having folded his legs cross-
wise, set his body erect, and established mindfulness in front of
him, ever mindful he breathes in, mindful he breathes out. 646

26. "Breathing in long, he understands: 'I breathe in long'; or
breathing out long, he understands: 'I breathe out long.'
Breathing in short, he understands: 'I breathe in short'; or
breathing out short, he understands: 'I breathe out short.' He
trains thus: 'I shall breathe in experiencing the whole body [of
breath]'; he trains thus: 'I shall breathe out experiencing the
whole body [of breath].' He trains thus: 'I shall breathe in tran-
quillising the bodily formation'; he trains thus: 'I shall breathe
out tranquillising the bodily formation.'

27. "He trains thus: 'I shall breathe in experiencing rapture';
he trains thus: 'I shall breathe out experiencing rapture.' He
trains thus: 'I shall breathe in experiencing pleasure'; he trains
thus: 'I shall breathe out experiencing pleasure.' He trains thus:
'I shall breathe in experiencing the mental formation'; he trains
thus: 'I shall breathe out experiencing the mental formation.' He
trains thus: 'I shall breathe in tranquillising the mental forma-
tion'; he trains thus: 'I shall breathe out tranquillising the mental
formation.'



, 532 Maharahulovada Sutta: Sutta 62 i 426


28. "He trains thus: "I shall breathe in experiencing the mind';
he trains thus: 'I shall breathe out experiencing the mind-' He
trains thus: 'I shall breathe in gladdening the mind'; he trains
thus: 'I shall breathe out gladdening the mind.' He trains thus: 'I
shall breathe in concentrating the mind'; he trains thus: 'I shall
breathe out concentrating the mind.' He trains thus: 'I shall
breathe in liberating the mind'; he trains thus: 'I shall breathe
out liberating the mind.'

29. "He trains thus: 'I shall breathe in contemplating imperma-
nence'; he trains thus: 'I shall breathe out contemplating imper-
manence.' He trains thus: 'I shall breathe in contemplating fading
away'; he trains thus: 'I shall breathe out contemplating fading
away.' He trains thus: 'I shall breathe in contemplating cessation';
he trains thus: 'I shall breathe out contemplating cessation.' He
trains thus: 'I shall breathe in contemplating relinquishment'; he
trains thus: 'I shall breathe out contemplating relinquishment/

30. "Rahula, that is how mindfulness of breathing is devel-
oped and cultivated, so that it is of great fruit and great benefit.
When mindfulness of breathing is developed and cultivated in
this way, [426] even the final in-breaths and out-breaths are
known as they cease, not unknown." 647

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Rahula was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.



63 Culamalunkya Sutta
The Shorter Discourse to
Malunkyaputta


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.

2. Theri, while the venerable Malunkyaputta was alone in
meditation, the following thought arose in his mind:

"These speculative views have been undeclared by the
Blessed One, set aside and rejected by him, namely: 'the world
is eternal' and 'the world is not eternal'; 'the world is finite' and
'the world is infinite'; 'the soul is the same as the body' and 'the
soul is one thing and the body another'; and 'after death a
Tathagata exists' and 'after death a Tathagata does not exist'
and 'after death a Tathagata both exists and does not exist' and
'after death a Tathagata neither exists nor does not exist.' The
Blessed One does not declare these to me, and I do not approve
of and accept the fact that he does not declare these to me, so I
shall go to the Blessed One and ask him the meaning of this. If
he declares to me either 'the world is eternal' or 'the world is
not eternal'... or 'after death a Tathagata neither exists nor does
not exist,' then I will lead the holy life under him; if he does not
declare these to me, then I will abandon the training and return
to the low life." [427]

3. Then, when it was evening, the venerable Malunkyaputta
rose from meditation and went to the Blessed One. After paying
homage to him, he sat down at one side and told him:

"Here, venerable sir, while I was alone in meditation, the fol-
lowing thought arose in my mind: 'These speculative views
have been undeclared by the Blessed One... If he does not
declare these to me, then I will abandon the training and return
to the low life.' If the Blessed One knows 'the world is eternal/
let the Blessed One declare to me 'the world is eternal'; if the


533


534 Culamaliinkya Sutta: Sutta 63


i 429


Blessed One knows 'the world is not eternal/ let the Blessed One
declare to me 'the world is not eternal.' If the Blessed One does
not know either 'the world is eternal' or 'the world is not eter-
nal/ then it is straightforward for one who does not know and
does not see to say: 'I do not know, I do not see/

"If the Blessed One knows 'the world is finite/... 'the world is
infinite/... 'the soul is the same as the body/... 'the soul is one
thing and the body another/... 'after death a Tathagata exists/
[428]... 'after death a Tathagata does not exist/... If the Blessed
One knows 'after death a Tathagata both exists and does not
exist/ let the Blessed One declare that to me; if the Blessed One
knows 'after death a Tathagata neither exists nor does not exist/
let the Blessed One declare that to me. If the Blessed One does
not know either 'after death a Tathagata both exists and does
not exist' or 'after death a Tathagata neither exists nor does not
exist/ then it is straightforward for one who does not know and
does not see to say: 'I do not know, I do not see/"

4. "How then, Malunkyaputta, did I ever say to you: 'Come,
Malunkyaputta, lead the holy life under me and I will declare to
you "the world is eternal"... or "after death a Tathagata neither
exists nor does not exist'"?" - "No, venerable sir." - "Did you
ever tell me: 'I will lead the holy life under the Blessed One, and
the Blessed One will declare to me "the world is eternal"... or
"after death a Tathagata neither exists nor does not exist'"?" -
"No, venerable sir." - "That being so, misguided man, who are
you and what are you abandoning?

5. "If anyone should say thus: 'I will not lead the holy life
under the Blessed One until the Blessed One declares to me "the
world is eternal"... or "after death a Tathagata neither exists nor
does not exist/" [429] that would still remain undeclared by the
Tathagata and meanwhile that person would die. Suppose,
Malunkyaputta, a man were wounded by an arrow thickly
smeared with poison, and his friends and companions, his kins-
men and relatives, brought a surgeon to treat him. The man
would say: 'I will not let the surgeon pull out this arrow until I
know whether the man who wounded me was a noble or a
brahmin or a merchant or a worker/ And he would say: 'I will
not let the surgeon pull out this arrow until I know the name and
clan of the man who wounded me;... until I know whether the


i 431


The Shorter Discourse to Malunkyaputta 535


man who wounded me was tall or short or of middle height;...
until I know whether the man who wounded me was dark or
brown or golden-skinned;... until I know whether the man who
wounded me lives in such a village or town or city;... until I
know whether the bow that wounded me was a long bow or a
crossbow; . . .until I know whether the bowstring that wounded
me was fibre or reed or sinew or hemp or bark;... until I know
whether the shaft that wounded me was wild or cultivated;...
until I know with what kind of feathers the shaft that wounded
me was fitted - whether those of a vulture or a crow or a hawk
or a peacock or a stork;. ..until I know with what kind of sinew
the shaft that wounded me was bound - whether that of an ox
or a buffalo or a lion or a monkey;... until I know what kind of
arrow it was that wounded me - whether it was hoof-tipped or
curved or barbed or calf-toothed or oleander/ [430]

"All this would still not be known to that man and meanwhile
he would die. So too, Malunkyaputta, if anyone should say thus:
'I will not lead the holy life under the Blessed One until the
Blessed One declares to me: "the world is eternal"... or "after
death a Tathagata neither exists nor does not exist/" that would
still remain undeclared by the Tathagata and meanwhile that
person would die.

6. "Malunkyaputta, if there is the view 'the world is eternal/
the holy life cannot be lived; and if there is the view 'the world
is not eternal,' the holy life cannot be lived. Whether there is the
view 'the world is eternal' or the view 'the world is not eternal/
there is birth, there is ageing, there is death, there are sorrow,
lamentation, pain, grief, and despair, the destruction of which I
prescribe here and now.

"If there is the view 'the world is finite,'.. .'the world is infi-
nite,'., .'the soul is the same as the body/.. .'the soul is one thing
and the body another/.. .'after death a Tathagata exists/... 'after
death a Tathagata does not exist,' the holy life cannot be lived...
[431] If there is the view 'after death a Tathagata both exists and
does not exist/ the holy life cannot be lived; and if there is the
view 'after death a Tathagata neither exists nor does not exist/
the holy life cannot be lived. Whether there is the view 'after
death a Tathagata both exists and does not exist' or the view
'after death a Tathagata neither exists nor does not exist,' there


i 432


536 Culamalunkya Sutta: Sutta 63


is birth, there is ageing, there is death, there are sorrow, lamen-
tation, pain, grief, and despair, the destruction of which I pre-
scribe here and now.

7. "Therefore, Malunkyaputta, remember what I have left
undeclared as undeclared, and remember what I have declared
as declared. And what have I left undeclared? 'The world is
eternal' - I have left undeclared. 'The world is not eternal' - I
have left undeclared. 'The world is finite' - I have left unde-
clared. 'The world is infinite' - I have left undeclared. 'The soul
is the same as the body' - 1 have left undeclared. 'The soul is one
thing and the body another' - I have left undeclared. 'After
death a Tathagata exists' - I have left undeclared. 'After death a
Tathagata does not exist' - I have left undeclared. 'After death a
Tathagata both exists and does not exist' - I have left unde-
clared. 'After death a Tathagata neither exists nor does not exist'
- 1 have left undeclared.

8. "Why have I left that undeclared? Because it is unbeneficial,
it does not belong to the fundamentals of the holy life, it does
not lead to disenchantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace,
to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to Nibbana. That is why
I have left it undeclared.

9. "And what have I declared? 'This is suffering' - I have
declared. 'This is the origin of suffering' - I have declared. 'This
is the cessation of suffering' - I have declared. 'This is the way
leading to the cessation of .suffering' - 1 have declared.

10. "Why have I declared that? Because it is beneficial, it be-
longs to the fundamentals of the holy life, it leads to disenchant-
ment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge,
to enlightenment, to Nibbana. That is why I have declared it.

"Therefore, Malunkyaputta, [432] remember what I have left
undeclared as undeclared, and remember what I have declared
as declared."

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Malunkya-
putta was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words. 648


64 Mahamalunkya Sutta
The Greater Discourse to
Malunkyaputta


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthT in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There he
addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, do you remember the five lower fetters as
taught by me?"

When this was said, the venerable Malunkyaputta replied:
"Venerable sir, I remember the five lower fetters as taught by
the Blessed One." 649

"But, Malunkyaputta, in what way do you remember the five
lower fetters as taught by me?"

"Venerable sir, I remember personality view as a lower fetter
taught by the Blessed One. I remember doubt as a lower fetter
taught by the Blessed One. I remember adherence to rules and
observances as a lower fetter taught by the Blessed One. I
remember sensual desire as a lower fetter taught by the Blessed
One. I remember ill will as a lower fetter taught by the Blessed
One. It is in this way, venerable sir, that I remember the five
lower fetters as taught by the Blessed One."

3. "Malunkyaputta, to whom do you remember my having
taught these five lower fetters in that way? 650 Would not the
wanderers of other sects confute you with the simile of the
infant? For a young tender infant lying prone does not even
have the notion 'personality,' [433] so how could personality
view arise in him? Yet the underlying tendency to personality
view lies within him. 651 A young tender infant lying prone does
not even have the notion 'teachings/ 652 so how could doubt
about teachings arise in him? Yet the underlying tendency to
doubt lies within him. A young tender infant lying prone does


537


538 Mahamalunkyaputta Sutta: Sutta 64


i 434


not even have the notion 'rules/ so how could adherence to
rules and observances arise in him? Yet the underlying tendency
to adhere to rules and observances lies within him. A young ten-
der infant lying prone does not even have the notion 'sensual
pleasures/ so how could sensual desire arise in him? Yet the
underlying tendency to sensual lust lies within him. A young
tender infant lying prone does not even have the notion 'beings/
so how could ill will towards beings arise in him? Yet the under-
lying tendency to ill will lies within him. Would not the wander-
ers of other sects confute you with this simile of the infant?"

4. Thereupon, the venerable Ananda said: "It is the time.
Blessed One, it is the time. Sublime One, for the Blessed One to
teach the five lower fetters. Having heard it from the Blessed
One, the bhikkhus will remember it."

"Then listen, Ananda, and attend closely to what I shall say."

"Yes, venerable sir," the venerable Ananda replied.

The Blessed One said this:

5. "Here, Ananda, an untaught ordinary person who has no
regard for noble ones and is unskilled and undisciplined in their
Dhamma, who has no regard for true men and is unskilled and
undisciplined in their Dhamma, abides with a mind obsessed
and enslaved by personality view, and he does not understand
as it actually is the escape from the arisen personality view; and
when that personality view has become habitual and is uneradi-
cated in him, it is a lower fetter. He abides with a mind obsessed
and enslaved by doubt.. *by adherence to rules and observances
. . .by sensual lust [434] . . .by ill will, and he does not understand
as it actually is the escape from arisen ill will; and when that ill
will has become habitual and is uneradicated in him, it is a
lower fetter.

6. "A well-taught noble disciple who has regard for noble ones
and is skilled and disciplined in their Dhamma, who has regard
for true men and is skilled and disciplined in their Dhamma,
does not abide with a mind obsessed and enslaved by personali-
ty view; he understands as it actually is the escape from the
arisen personality view, and personality view together with the
underlying tendency to it is abandoned in him. 653 He does not
abide with a mind obsessed and enslaved by doubt. . .by adher-
ence to rules and observances... by sensual lust... by ill will; he
understands as it actually is the escape from the arisen ill will.


i 435


The Greater Discourse to Malunkyaputta 539


and ill will together with the underlying tendency to it is aban-
doned in him.

7. "There is a path, Ananda, a way to the abandoning of the
five lower fetters; that anyone, without coming to that path, to
that way, shall know or see or abandon the five lower fetters -
this is not possible. Just as when there is a great tree standing
possessed of heartwood, it is not possible that anyone shall cut
out its heartwood without cutting through its bark and sap-
wood, so too, there is a path. . .this is not possible.

"There is a path, Ananda, a way to the abandoning of the five
lower fetters; [435] that someone, by coming to that path, to that
way, shall know and see and abandon the five lower fetters -
this is possible. Just as, when there is a great tree standing pos-
sessed of heartwood, it is possible that someone shall cut Out its
heartwood by cutting through its bark and sapwood, so too,
there is a path. . .this is possible.

8. "Suppose, Ananda, the river Ganges were full of water right
up to the brim so that crows could drink from it, and then a fee-
ble man came thinking: 'By swimming across the stream with
my arms, I shall get safely across to the further shore of this
river Ganges'; yet he would not be able to get safely across. So
too, when the Dhamma is being taught to someone for the cessa-
tion of personality, if his mind does not enter into it and acquire
confidence, steadiness, and decision, then he can be regarded as
like the feeble man.

"Suppose, Ananda, the river Ganges were full of water right up
to the brim so that crows could drink from it, and then a strong
man came thinking: 'By swimming across the stream with my
arms, I shall get safely across to the further shore of this river
Ganges'; and he would be able to get safely across. So too, when
the Dhamma is being taught to someone for the cessation of per-
sonality, if his mind enters into it and acquires confidence, steadi-
ness, and decision, then he can be regarded as like the strong man.

9. "And what, Ananda, is the path, the way to the abandoning
of the five lower fetters? Here, with seclusion from objects of
attachment, 654 with the abandoning of unwholesome states, with
the complete tranquillization of bodily inertia, quite secluded
from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a
bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the first jhana, which is
accompanied by applied and sustained thought, with rapture


540 Mahamalunkyaputta Sutta: Sutta 64


i 436


and pleasure bom of seclusion.

"Whatever exists therein of material form, feeling, perception,
formations, and consciousness, he sees those states as imperma-
nent, as suffering, as a disease, as a tumour, as a barb, as a
calamity, as an affliction, as alien, as disintegrating, as void, as
not self. 655 He turns his mind away from those states [436] and
directs it towards the deathless element thus: 'This is the peace-
ful, this is the sublime, that is, the stilling of all formations, the
relinquishing of all attachments, the destruction of craving,
dispassion, cessation, Nibbana/ 656 Standing upon that, he
attains the destruction of the taints. But if he does not attain the
destruction of the taints, then because of that desire for the
Dhainma, that delight in the Dhamma, 657 with the destruction of
the five lower fetters he becomes one due to reappear sponta-
neously [in the Pure Abodes] and there attain final Nibbana
without ever returning from that world. This is the path, the
way to the abandoning of the five lower fetters.

10-12. "Again, with the stilling of applied and sustained
thought, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second
jhana. ..Again, with the fading away as well of rapture, a
bhikkhu... enters upon and abides in the third jhana... Again,
with the abandoning of pleasure and pain... a bhikkhu enters
upon and abides in the fourth jhana, which has neither-pain-
nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.

"Whatever exists therein of material form, feeling, perception,
formations, and consciousness, he sees those states as imperma-
nent... as not self. He turns his mind away from those states and
directs it towards the deathless element... This is the path, the
way to the abandoning of the five lower fetters.

13. "Again, with the complete surmounting of perceptions of
form, with the disappearance of perceptions of sensory impact,
with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space
is infinite/ a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of infi-
nite space.

"Whatever exists therein of feeling, perception, formations,
and consciousness, 658 he sees those states as impermanent... as
not self. He turns his mind away from those states and directs it
towards the deathless element... This is the path, the way to the
abandoning of the five lower fetters.

14. "Again, by completely surmounting the base of infinite


i 437


The Greater Discourse to Malunkyaputta 541


space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite,' a bhikkhu enters
upon and abides in the base of infinite consciousness.

"Whatever exists therein of feeling, perception, formations,
and consciousness, he sees those states as impermanent... as not
self. He turns his mind away from those states and directs it
towards the deathless element... This is the path, the way to the
abandoning of the five lower fetters.

15. "Again, by completely surmounting the base of infinite
consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing,' a bhikkhu enters
upon and abides in the base of nothingness.

"Whatever exists therein of feeling, perception, formations,
and consciousness, he sees those states as impermanent, as suf-
fering, as a disease, as a tumour, as a barb, as a calamity, as an
affliction, as alien, as disintegrating, as void, as not self. He
turns his mind away from those states and directs it towards the
deathless element thus: 'This is the peaceful, this is the sublime,
that is, the stilling of all formations, the relinquishing of all
attachments, the destruction of craving, dispassion, cessation,
Nibbana.' Standing upon that, [437] he attains the destruction of
the taints. But if he does not attain the destruction of the taints,
then because of that desire for the Dhamma, that delight in the
Dhamma, with the destruction of the five lower fetters he
becomes one due to reappear spontaneously [in the Pure
Abodes] and there attain final Nibbana without ever returning
from that world. This is the path, the way to the abandoning of
the five lower fetters."

16. "Venerable sir, if this is the path, the way to the abandon-
ing of the five lower fetters, then how is it that some bhikkhus
here [are said to] gain deliverance of mind and some [are said
to] gain deliverance by wisdom?"

"The difference here, Ananda, is in their faculties, I say." 659

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Ananda was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.



65 Bhaddali Sutta
To Bhaddali


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There he
addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, I eat at a single session. By so doing, I am free
from illness and affliction, and I enjoy health, strength, and a
comfortable abiding. 660 Come, bhikkhus, eat at a single session.
By so doing, you too will be free from illness and affliction, and
you will enjoy health, strength, and a comfortable abiding."

3. When this was said, the venerable Bhaddali told the Blessed
One: "Venerable sir, I am not willing to eat at a single session; for
if I were to do so, I might have worry and anxiety about it." 661

"Then, Bhaddali, eat one part there where you are invited and
bring away one part to eat. By eating in that way, [438] you will
maintain yourself." '

"Venerable sir, I am not willing to eat in that way either; for if
I were to do so, I might also have worry and anxiety about it." 662

4. Then, when this training precept was being made known by
the Blessed One, 663 the venerable Bhaddali publicly declared in
the Sangha of bhikkhus his unwillingness to undertake the
training. Then the venerable Bhaddali did not present himself to
the Blessed One for the whole of that three-month period [of the
Rains], as he did not fulfil the training in the Teacher's Dispen-
sation.

5. Now on that occasion a number of bhikkhus were engaged
in making up a robe for the Blessed One, thinking: "With his
robe completed, at the end of the three months [of the Rains],
the Blessed One will set out wandering."

6. Then the venerable Bhaddali went to those bhikkhus and
exchanged greetings with them, and when this courteous and


542


i439


To Bhaddali 543


amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side. When he had
done so, they said to him: "Friend Bhaddali, this robe is being
made up for the Blessed One. With his robe completed, at the end
of the three months [of the Rains], the Blessed One will set out
wandering. Please, friend Bhaddali, give proper attention to your
declaration. Do not let it become more difficult for you later on."

7. "Yes, friends," he replied, and he went to the Blessed One,
and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and
said: "Venerable sir, a transgression overcame me, in that like a
fool, confused and blundering, when a training precept was
being made known by the Blessed One, I publicly declared in
the Sangha of bhikkhus my unwillingness to undertake the
training. Venerable sir, may the Blessed One forgive my trans-
gression seen as such for the sake of restraint in the future."

8. "Surely, Bhaddali, a transgression overcame you, in that like
a fool, confused and blundering, when a training precept was
being made known by me, you publicly declared in the Sangha
of bhikkhus your unwillingness to undertake the training.

9. "Bhaddali, this circumstance was not recognised by you:
The Blessed One is living at SavatthI, and the Blessed One will
know me thus: "The bhikkhu named Bhaddali is one who does
not fulfil the training in the Teacher's Dispensation/" This cir-
cumstance was not recognised by you.

"Also, this circumstance was not recognised by you: 'Many
[439] bhikkhus have taken up residence at SavatthI for the Rains,
and they too will know me thus: "The bhikkhu named Bhaddali
is one who does not fulfil the training in the Teacher's Dis-
pensation.'" This circumstance too was not recognised by you.

"Also, this circumstance was not recognised by you: 'Many
bhikkhurus have taken up residence at SavatthI for the Rains, and
they too will know me thus: "The bhikkhu named Bhaddali is one
who does not fulfil the training in the Teacher's Dispensation."’
This circumstance too was not recognised by you.

"Also, this circumstance was not recognised by you: 'Many
men lay followers... Many women lay followers are staying at
SavatthI, and they too will know me thus: "The bhikkhu named
Bhaddali is one who does not fulfil the training in the Teacher's
Dispensation.'" This circumstance too was not recognised by you.

"Also, this circumstance was not recognised by you: 'Many
recluses and brahmins of other sects have taken up residence


544 Bhaddali Sutta: Sutta 65


i 440


at Savatthi for the Rains, and they too will know me thus: "The
bhikkhu named Bhaddali, an elder disciple of the recluse
Gotama, is one who does not fulfil the training in the
Teacher's Dispensation.'" This circumstance too was not recog-
nised by you."

10. "Venerable sir, a transgression overcame me, in that like a
fool, confused and blundering, when a training precept was
being made known by the Blessed One, I publicly declared in
the Sangha of bhikkhus my unwillingness to undertake the
training. Venerable sir, may the Blessed One forgive my trans-
gression seen as such for the sake of restraint in the future."

"Surely, Bhaddali, a transgression overcame you, in that like a
fool, confused and blundering, when a training precept was
being made known by me, you publicly declared in the Sangha
of bhikkhus your unwillingness to undertake the training.

11. "What do you think, Bhaddali? Suppose a bhikkhu here
were one liberated-in-both-ways, 664 and I told him: 'Come,
bhikkhu, be a plank for me to walk across the mud.' Would he
walk across himself, 665 or would he dispose his body otherwise,
or would he say 'No'?"

"No, venerable sir."

"What do you think, Bhaddali? Suppose a bhikkhu here were
one liberated-by-wisdom...a body-witness... one attained-to-
view...one liberated-by-faith...a Dhamma-follower...a faith-
follower, and I told him: 'Come, bhikkhu, be a' plank for me to
walk across the mud.' Would he walk across himself, or would
he dispose his body otherwise, or would he say 'No'?"

"No, venerable sir."

12. "What do you think, Bhaddali? Were you on that occasion
one liberated-in-both-ways or [440] one liberated-by-wisdom or
a body-witness or one attained-to-view or one liberated-by-faith
or a Dhamma-follower or a faith-follower?"

"No, venerable sir."

"Bhaddali, on that occasion were you not an empty, hollow
wrong-doer?"

13. "Yes, venerable sir. Venerable sir, a transgression over-
came me, in that like a fool, confused and blundering, when a
training precept was being made known by the Blessed One, I
publicly declared in the Sangha of bhikkhus my unwillingness
to undertake the training. Venerable sir, may the Blessed One



i 441


To Bhaddali 545


forgive my transgression seen as such for the sake of restraint in
the future."

"Surely, Bhaddali, a transgression overcame you, in that like a
fool, confused and blundering, when a training precept was
being made known by me, you publicly declared in the Sangha
of bhikkhus your unwillingness to undertake the training. But
since you see your transgression as such and make amends in
accordance with the Dhamma, we forgive you; for it is growth
in the Noble One's Discipline when one sees one's transgression
as such and makes amends in accordance with the Dhamma by
undertaking restraint for the future.

14. "Here, Bhaddali, some bhikkhu does not fulfil the training
in the Teacher's Dispensation. He considers thus: 'Suppose I
were to resort to a secluded resting place: the forest, the root of a
tree, a mountain, a ravine, a hillside cave, a charnel ground, a
jungle thicket, an open space, a heap of straw - perhaps I might
realise a superhuman state, a distinction in knowledge and
vision worthy of the noble ones.' He resorts to some such
secluded resting-place. While he lives thus withdrawn, the
Teacher censures him, wise companions in the holy life who
have made investigation censure him, gods censure him, and he
censures himself. Being censured in this way by the Teacher, by
wise companions in the holy life, by gods, and by himself, he
realises no superhuman state, no distinction in knowledge and
vision worthy of the noble ones. Why is that? That is how it is
with one who does not fulfil the training in the Teacher's
Dispensation.

15. "Here, Bhaddali, some bhikkhu does fulfil the training in
the Teacher's Dispensation. He considers thus: 'Suppose I were
to resort to a secluded resting place: the forest, the root of a
tree, a mountain, a ravine, a hillside cave, a charnel ground, a
jungle thicket, [441] an open space, a heap of straw - perhaps I
might realise a superhuman state, a distinction in knowledge
and vision worthy of the noble ones.' He resorts to some such
secluded resting-place. While he lives thus withdrawn, the
Teacher does not censure him, wise companions in the holy life
who have made investigation do not censure him, gods do not
censure him, and he does not censure himself. Being uncen-
sured in this way by the Teacher, by wise companions in the
holy life, by gods, and by himself, he realises a superhuman


546 Bhaddali Sutta: Sutta 65


i 442



state, a distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the
noble ones.

16. "Quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unwholesome states, he enters upon and abides in the first
jhana, which is accompanied by applied and sustained thought,
with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion. Why is that? That
is how it is with one who fulfils the training in the Teacher's
Dispensation.

17. "With the stilling of applied and sustained thought, he
enters upon and abides in the second jhana... With the fading
away as well of rapture... he enters upon and abides in the third
jhana... With the abandoning of pleasure and pain. ..he enters
upon and abides in the fourth jhana... Why is that? That is how
it is with one who fulfils the training in the Teacher's Dis-
pensation.

18. "When his concentrated mind is thus purified and bright,
unblemished, rid of imperfection, malleable, wieldy, steady, and
attained to imperturbability, he directs it to knowledge of the
recollection of past lives... (as Sutta 51, §24 )... Thus with their
aspects and particulars he recollects his manifold past lives.
Why is that? That is how [442] it is with one who fulfils the
training in the Teacher's Dispensation.

19. "When his concentrated mind is thus purified and
bright... attained to imperturbability, he directs it to knowledge
of the passing away and reappearance of beings... (as Sutta 51,
§25 )... Thus with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses
the human, he understands how beings pass on according to
their actions. Why is that? That is how it is with one who fulfils
the training in the Teacher's Dispensation.

20. "When his concentrated mind is thus purified and
bright... attained to imperturbability, he directs it to knowledge
of the destruction of the taints. He understands as it actually is:
'This is suffering'... (as Sutta 51, §26 ). ..He understands as it actu-
ally is: 'This is the way leading to the cessation of the taints.'

21. "When he knows and sees thus, his mind is liberated from
the taint of sensual desire, from the taint of being, and from the
taint of ignorance. When it is liberated there comes the knowl-
edge: 'It is liberated.' He understands: 'Birth is destroyed, the
holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done,
there is no more coming to any state of being.' Why is that? That


i 443


To Bhaddali 547


is how it is with one who fulfils the training in the Teacher's
Dispensation."

22. Thereupon the venerable Bhaddali asked: "Venerable sir,
what is the cause, what is the reason, why they take action against
some bhikkhu here by repeatedly admonishing him? What is
the cause, what is the reason, why they do not take such action
against some bhikkhu here by repeatedly admonishing him?"

23. "Here, Bhaddali, some bhikkhu is a constant offender
with many offences. When he is corrected by the bhikkhus, he
prevaricates, leads the talk aside, shows disturbance, hate, and
bitterness; he does not proceed rightly, he does not comply, he
does not clear himself, he does not say: 'Let me so act that the
Sangha will be satisfied.' [443] Bhikkhus, taking account of this
matter, think: 'It would be good if the venerable ones examine
this bhikkhu in such a way that this litigation against him is
not settled too quickly.' And the bhikkhus examine that
bhikkhu in such a way that the litigation against him is not set-
tled too quickly.

24. "But here some bhikkhu is a constant offender with many
offences. When he is corrected by the bhikkhus, he does not
prevaricate, lead the talk aside, or show disturbance, hate, and
bitterness; he proceeds rightly, he complies, he clears himself,
he says: 'Let me so act that the Sangha will be satisfied.'
Bhikkhus, taking account of this matter, think: 'It would be
good if the venerable ones examine this bhikkhu in such a way
that this litigation against him is settled quickly.' And the
bhikkhus examine that bhikkhu in such a way that the litigation
against him is settled quickly.

25. "Here some bhikkhu is a chance offender without many
offences. When he is corrected by the bhikkhus, he prevari-
cates... (repeat rest of §23). ..And the bhikkhus examine that
bhikkhu in such a way that [444] the litigation against him is not
settled too quickly.

26. "But here some bhikkhu is a chance offender without
many offences. When he is corrected by the bhikkhus, he does
not prevaricate ... (repeat rest of §24 )... And the bhikkhus examine
that bhikkhu in such a way that the litigation against him is set-
tled quickly.

27. "Here some bhikkhu progresses by a measure of faith and
love. 666 In this case bhikkhus consider thus: 'Friends, this


548 Bhaddali Sutta: Sutta 65


bhikkhu progresses by a measure of faith and love. Let him not
lose that measure of faith and love, as he may if we take action
against him by repeatedly admonishing him.' Suppose a man
had only one eye; then his friends and companions, his kinsmen
and relatives, would guard his eye, thinking: 'Let him not lose
his one eye.' So too, some bhikkhu progresses by a measure of
faith and love... 'Let him not lose that measure of faith and love,
as he may if we take action against him by repeatedly admon-
ishing him.'

28. "This is the cause, this is the reason, why they take action
against some bhikkhu here by repeatedly admonishing him; this
is the cause, this is the reason, why they do not take such action
against some bhikkhu here by repeatedly admonishing him."

29. "Venerable sir, what is the cause, what is the reason, why
there were previously [445] fewer training rules and more
bhikkhus became established in final knowledge? What is the
cause, what is the reason, why there are now more training rules
and fewer bhikkhus become established in final knowledge?"

30. "That is how it is, Bhaddali. When beings are deteriorating
and the true Dhamma is disappearing, then there are more
training rules and fewer bhikkhus become established in final
knowledge. The Teacher does not make known the training rule
for disciples until certain things that are the basis for taints
become manifest here in the Sangha; 667 but when certain things
that are the basis for taints become manifest here in the Sangha,
then the Teacher makes known the training rule for disciples in
order to ward off those things that are the basis for taints.

31. "Those things that are the basis for taints do not become
manifest here in the Sangha until the Sangha has reached great-
ness; but when the Sangha has reached greatness, then those
things that are the basis for taints become manifest here in the
Sangha, and then the Teacher makes known the training rule for
disciples in order to ward off those things that are the basis for
taints. Those things that are the basis for taints do not become
manifest here in the Sangha until the Sangha has reached the
acme of worldly gain... the acme of fame... the acme of great
learning... the acme of long-standing renown; but when the
Sangha has reached the acme of long-standing renown, then
those things that are the basis for taints become manifest here in
the Sangha, and then the Teacher makes known the training rule


i 446


To Bhaddali 549


for disciples in order to ward off those things that are the basis
for taints.

32. "There were few of you, Bhaddali, when I taught the
Dhamma through the simile of the young thoroughbred colt. Do
you remember that, Bhaddali?"

"No, venerable sir."

"To what reason do you attribute that?"

"Venerable sir, I have long been one who did not fulfil the
training in the Teacher's Dispensation."

"That is not the only cause or the only reason. But rather, by
encompassing your mind with my mind, I have long known
you thus: 'When I am teaching the Dhamma, this misguided
man does not heed it, does not give it attention, does not engage
it with all his mind, does not hear the Dhamma with eager ears.'
Still, Bhaddali, I will teach you the Dhamma through the simile
of the young thoroughbred colt. Listen and attend closely [446]
to what I shall say."

"Yes, venerable sir," the venerable Bhaddali replied.

The Blessed One said this:

33. "Bhaddali, suppose a clever horse-trainer obtains a fine
thoroughbred colt. He first makes him get used to wearing the
bit. While the colt is being made to get used to wearing the bit,
because he is doing something that he has never done before, he
displays some contortion, writhing, and vacillation, but through
constant repetition and gradual practice, he becomes peaceful in
that action. 668

"When the colt has become peaceful in that action, the horse-
trainer further makes him get used to wearing the harness.
While the colt is being made to get used to wearing the harness,
because he is doing something that he has never done before, he
displays some contortion, writhing, and vacillation, but through
constant repetition and gradual practice, he becomes peaceful in
that action.

"When the colt has become peaceful in that action, the horse-
trainer further makes him act in keeping in step, in running in a
circle, in prancing, in galloping, in charging, in the kingly quali-
ties, in the kingly heritage, in the highest speed, in the highest
fleetness, in the highest gentleness. While the colt is being made
to get used to doing these things, because he is doing something
that he has never done before, he displays some contortion.


550 Bhaddali Sutta: Sutta 65


i447


writhing, and vacillation, but through constant repetition and
gradual practice, he becomes peaceful in those actions.

"When the colt has become peaceful in these actions, the
horse-trainer further rewards him with a rubbing down and a
grooming. When a fine thoroughbred colt possesses these ten
factors, he is worthy of the king, in the king's service, and con-
sidered one of the factors of a king.

34. "So too, Bhaddali, when a bhikkhu possesses ten quali-
ties, he is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of
offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed
field of merit for the world. What are the ten? Here, Bhaddali,
a bhikkhu possesses the right view of one beyond training, 669
the right intention of one beyond training, the right speech of
one beyond training, the right action of one beyond training, the
right livelihood of one beyond training, the right effort of one
beyond training, [447] the right mindfulness of one beyond
training, the right concentration of one beyond training, the
right knowledge of one beyond training, and the right deliver-
ance of one beyond training. 670 When a bhikkhu possesses these
ten qualities, he is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy
of offerings, worthy of reverential salutation, an unsurpassed
field of merit for the world."

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Bhaddali was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


66 Latukikopama Sutta
The Simile of the Quail


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing in the country of the Anguttarapans at a town of theirs
named Apana.

2. Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One dressed, and
taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Apana for alms. When
he had wandered for alms in Apana and had returned from his
almsround, after his meal he went to a certain grove for the
day's abiding. Having entered the grove, he sat down at the root
of a tree for the day's abiding.

3. When it was morning, the venerable Udayin dressed, and
taking his bowl and outer robe, he too went into Apana for
alms. When he had wandered for alms in Apana and had
returned from his almsround, after his meal he went to that
same grove for the day's abiding. Having entered the grove, he
sat down at the root of a tree for the day's abiding.

4. Then, while the venerable Udayin was alone in meditation,
the following thought arose in his mind: "How many painful
states has the Blessed One rid us of! How many pleasant states
has the Blessed One brought us! How many unwholesome
states has the Blessed One rid us of! How many wholesome
states has the Blessed One brought us!"

5. Then, when it was evening, the venerable Udayin rose from
meditation, went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage
to him, he sat down at one side [448] and told him:

6. "Here, venerable sir, while I was alone in meditation, the
following thought arose in my mind: 'How many painful states
has the Blessed One rid us of!... How many wholesome states
has the Blessed One brought us!' Venerable sir, formerly we
used to eat in the evening, in the morning, and during the day
outside the proper time. Then there was an occasion when the


551


552 Latukikopama Sutta: Sutta 66


i 449


Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus: 'Bhikkhus, please
abandon that daytime meal outside the proper time.' 67 !
Venerable sir, I was upset and sad, thinking: 'Faithful household-
ers give us good food of various kinds during the day outside the
proper time, yet the Blessed One tells us to abandon it, the
Sublime One tells us to relinquish it.' Out of our love and
respect for the Blessed One, and out of shame and fear of
wrongdoing, we abandoned that daytime meal outside the
proper time.

"Then we ate only in the evening and in the morning. Then
there was an occasion when the Blessed One addressed the
bhikkhus thus: 'Bhikkhus, please abandon that night meal,
which is outside the proper time.' Venerable sir, I was upset and
sad, thinking: 'The Blessed One tells us to abandon the more
sumptuous of our two meals, the Sublime One tells us to relin-
quish it.' Once, venerable sir, a certain man had obtained some
soup during the day and he said: 'Put that aside and we will all
eat it together in the evening.' [Nearly] all cooking is done at
night, little by day. Out of our love and respect for the Blessed
One, and out of shame and fear of wrongdoing, we abandoned
that night meal, which was outside the proper time.

"It has happened, venerable sir, that bhikkhus wandering for
alms in the thick darkness of the night have walked into a
cesspit, fallen into a sewer, walked into a thornbush, and fallen
over a sleeping cow; they have met hoodlums who had already
committed a crime and those planning one, and they have
been sexually enticed by women. Once, venerable sir, I went
wandering for alms in the thick darkness of the night. A woman
washing a pot saw me by a flash of lightning and screamed out
in terror: 'Mercy me, a devil has come for me!' I told her: 'Sister,
I am no devil, I am a bhikkhu [449] waiting for alms.' - 'Then it's
a bhikkhu whose ma's died and whose pa's died! 672 Better,
bhikkhu, that you get your belly cut open with a sharp butcher's
knife than this prowling for alms for your belly's sake in the
thick darkness of the night!' Venerable sir, when I recollected
that I thought: 'How many painful states has the Blessed One
rid us of! How many pleasant states has the Blessed One
brought us! How many unwholesome states has the Blessed
One rid us of! How many wholesome states has the Blessed One
brought us!"'


i 450


The Simile of the Quail 553


7. "So too, Udayin, there are certain misguided men here who,
when told by me 'Abandon this,' say: 'What, such a mere trifle,
such a little thing as this? This recluse is much too exacting!' And
they do not abandon that and they show discourtesy towards me
as well as towards those bhikkhus desirous of training. For them
that thing becomes a strong, stout, tough, unrotting tether and a
thick yoke.

8. "Suppose, Udayin, a quail were tethered by a rotting creep-
er and would thereby expect injury, captivity, or death. Now
suppose someone said: 'The rotting creeper by which that quail
is tethered and thereby expects injury, captivity, or death, is for
her a feeble, weak, rotting, coreless tether.' Would he be speak-
ing rightly?"

"No, venerable sir. For that quail the rotting creeper by which
she is tethered and thereby expects injury, captivity, or death, is
a strong, stout, tough, unrotting tether and a thick yoke."

"So too, Udayin there are certain misguided men here who,
when told by me 'Abandon this'... do not abandon that and they
show discourtesy towards me as well as towards those bhikkhus
desirous of training. For them that thing becomes a strong, stout,
tough, unrotting tether and a thick yoke.

9. "Udayin, there are certain clansmen here who, [450] when
told by me 'Abandon this/ say: 'What, such a mere trifle, such a
little thing to be abandoned as this, the Blessed One tells us to
abandon, the Sublime One tells us to relinquish.' Yet they aban-
don that and do not show discourtesy towards me or towards
those bhikkhus desirous of training. Having abandoned it, they
live at ease, unruffled, subsisting on others' gifts, with mind [as
aloof] as a wild deer's. For them that thing becomes a feeble,
weak, rotting, coreless tether.

10. "Suppose, Udayin, a royal tusker elephant with tusks as
long as chariot-poles, full-grown in stature, high-bred and
accustomed to battle, were tethered by stout leather thongs, but
by simply twisting his body a little he could break and burst the
thongs and then go where he likes. Now suppose someone said:
'The stout leather thongs by which this royal tusker elephant is
tethered... are for him a strong, stout, tough, unrotting tether
and a thick yoke.' Would he be speaking rightly?"

"No, venerable sir. The stout leather thongs by which that
royal tusker elephant is tethered, which by simply twisting his


554 Latukikopama Sutta: Sutta 66


i 451


body a little he could break and burst and then go where he
likes, are for him a feeble, weak, rotting, coreless tether."

"So too, Udayin, there are certain clansmen here who, when
told by me 'Abandon this'... abandon that and do not show dis-
courtesy towards me or towards those bhikkhus desirous of
training. Having abandoned it, they live at ease, unruffled, sub-
sisting on others' gifts, with mind [as aloof] as a wild deer's. For
them that thing becomes a feeble, weak, rotting, coreless tether.

11. "Suppose, Udayin, there were a poor, penniless, destitute
man, and he had one dilapidated hovel open to the crows, not
the best kind, and one dilapidated wicker bedstead, not the best
kind, [451] and some grain and pumpkin seeds in a pot, not the
best kind, and one hag of a wife, not the best kind. He might see
a bhikkhu in a monastery park sitting in the shade of a tree, his
hands and feet well washed after he had eaten a delicious meal,
devoting himself to the higher mind. He might think: 'How
pleasant the recluse's state is! How healthy the recluse's state is!
If only I could shave off my hair and beard, put on the yellow
robe, and go forth from the home life into homelessness!' But
being unable to abandon his one dilapidated hovel open to the
crows, not the best kind, and his one dilapidated wicker bed-
stead, not the best kind, and his grain and pumpkin seeds in a
pot, not the best kind, and his hag of a wife, not the best kind, he
is unable to shave off his hair and beard, put on the yellow robe,
and go forth from the home life into homelessness. Now sup-
pose someone said: 'The tethers by which that man is tethered
so that he cannot abandon his one dilapidated hovel... and his
hag of a wife, not the best kind, and shave off his hair and
beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from the home life
into homelessness - for him those are a feeble, weak, rotting,
coreless tether.' Would he be speaking rightly?"

"No, venerable sir. The tethers by which that man is tethered
so that he cannot abandon his one dilapidated hovel... and his
hag of a wife, not the best kind, and shave off his hair and
beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from the home life
into homelessness - for him those are a strong, stout, tough,
unrotting tether and a thick yoke."

"So too, Udayin, there are certain misguided men here who,
when told by me 'Abandon this'... do not abandon that and they
show discourtesy towards me as well as towards those bhikkhus


i 453


The Simile of the Quail 555


desirous of training. For them that thing becomes a strong, stout,
tough, unrotting tether and a thick yoke.

12. "Suppose, Udayin, there were a rich householder or a
householder's son, [452] with great wealth and property, with a
vast number of gold ingots, a vast number of granaries, a vast
number of fields, a vast amount of land, a vast number of wives,
and a vast number of men and women slaves. He might see a
bhikkhu in a monastery park sitting in the shade of a tree, his
hands and feet well washed after he had eaten a delicious meal,
devoting himself to the higher mind. He might think: 'How
pleasant the recluse's state is! How healthy the recluse's state is!
If only I could shave off my hair and beard, put on the yellow
robe, and go forth from the home life into homelessness!' And
being able to abandon his vast number of gold ingots, his vast
number of granaries, his vast number of fields, his vast amount
of land, his vast number of wives, and his vast number of men
and women slaves, he is able to shave off his hair and beard, put
on the yellow robe, and go forth from the home life into home-
lessness. Now suppose someone said: 'The tethers by which that
householder or householder's son is tethered so that he can
abandon his vast number of gold ingots. . .his vast number of men
and women slaves, and shave off his hair and beard, put on the
yellow robe, and go forth from the home life into homelessness -
for him those are a strong, stout, tough, unrotting tether.' Would
he be speaking rightly?"

"No, venerable sir. The tethers by which that householder or
householder's son is tethered so that he can abandon his vast
number of gold ingots... his vast number of men and women
slaves, and shave off his hair and beard, put on the yellow robe,
and go forth from the home life into homelessness - for him
those are a feeble, weak, rotting, coreless tether."

"So too, Udayin, there are certain clansmen here who, when
told by me 'Abandon this '...abandon that and do not show dis-
courtesy towards me or towards those bhikkhus desirous of
training. [453] Having abandoned it, they live at ease, unruf-
fled, subsisting on others' gifts, with mind [as aloof] as a wild
deer's. For them that thing becomes a feeble, weak, rotting,
coreless tether.

13. "Udayin, there are four kinds of persons to be found exist-
ing in the world. What are the four? 673


556 Latukikopama Sutta: Sutta 66


i 454


14. “Here, Udayin, some person practises the way to the aban-
doning of attachment, to the relinquishing of attachment. 674
When he is practising the way, memories and intentions associ-
ated with attachment beset him. He tolerates them; he does not
abandon them, remove them, do away with them, and annihi-
late them. Such a person I call fettered, not unfettered. Why is
that? Because I have known the particular diversity of faculties
in this person.

15. "Here, Udayin, some person practises the way to the aban-
doning of attachment, to the relinquishing of attachment. When
he is practising the way, memories and intentions associated
with attachment beset him. He does not tolerate them; he aban-
dons them, removes them, does away with them, and annihilates
them. Such a person too I call fettered, not unfettered. Why is
that? Because I have known the particular diversity of faculties in
this person. 675

16. "Here, Udayin, some person practises the way to the aban-
doning of attachment, to the relinquishing of attachment. When
he is practising the way, memories and intentions associated
with attachment beset him now and then through lapses of
mindfulness. His mindfulness may be slow in arising, but he
quickly abandons them, removes them, does away with them,
and annihilates them. 676 Just as if a man were to let two or three
drops of water fall onto an iron plate heated for a whole day, the
falling of the water drops might be slow but they would quickly
vaporise and vanish. So too, here some person practises the
way... His mindfulness may be slow in arising, but he quickly
abandons them, removes them, does away with them, and anni-
hilates them. Such a person too I call fettered, not unfettered.
[454] Why is that? Because I have known the particular diversity
of faculties in this person.

17. "Here, Udayin, some person, having understood that
attachment is the root of suffering, divests himself of attachment
and is liberated with the destruction of attachment. Such a per-
son I call unfettered, not fettered. 677 Why is that? Because I have
known the particular diversity of faculties in this person.

18. "There are, Udayin, five cords of sensual pleasure. What
are the five? Forms cognizable by the eye that are wished for,
desired, agreeable, and likeable, connected with sensual desire
and provocative of lust. Sounds cognizable by the ear... Odours


i 455


The Simile of the Quail 557


cognizable by the nose... Flavours cognizable by the tongue...
Tangibles cognizable by the body that are wished for, desired,
agreeable, and likeable, connected with sensual desire and
provocative of lust. These are the five cords of sensual pleasure.

19. "Now, Udayin, the pleasure and joy that arise dependent
on these five cords of sensual pleasure are called sensual plea-
sure - a filthy pleasure, a coarse pleasure, an ignoble pleasure. I
say of this kind of pleasure that it should not be pursued, that it
should not be developed, that it should not be cultivated, that it
should be feared.

20. "Here, Udayin, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and
abides in the first jhana... With the stilling of applied and sus-
tained thought, he enters upon and abides in the second
jhana. . . With the fading away as well of rapture. . .he enters upon
and abides in the third jhana. ..With the abandoning of pleasure
and pain. . .he enters upon and abides in the fourth jhana. . .

21. "This is called the bliss of renunciation, the bliss of seclusion,
the bliss of peace, the bliss of enlightenment. 678 I say of this kind
of pleasure that it should be pursued, that it should be devel-
oped, that it should be cultivated, that it should not be feared.

22. "Here, Udayin, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and
abides in the first jhana... Now this, I say, belongs to the per-
turbable. 679 And what therein belongs to the perturbable? The
applied thought and sustained thought that have not ceased
therein, that is what belongs to the perturbable.

23. "Here, Udayin, with the stilling of applied and sustained
thought, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second
jhana. . .Now this, I say, also belongs to the perturbable. And what
therein belongs to the perturbable? The rapture and pleasure that
have not ceased therein, that is what belongs to the perturbable.

24. "Here, Udayin, with the fading away as well of rapture... a
bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the third jhana... Now this, I
say, also belongs to the perturbable. And what therein belongs
to the perturbable? The equanimity [455] and pleasure that have
not ceased therein, that is what belongs to the perturbable.

25. "Here, Udayin, with the abandoning of pleasure and
pain... a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the fourth jhana...
Now this, I say, belongs to the imperturbable.


558 Latukikopama Sutta: Sutta 66


i 456


26. "Here, Udayin, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and
abides in the first jhana. . .That, I say, is not enough. 680 Abandon
it, I say; surmount it, I say. And what surmounts it?

27. "Here, Udayin, with the stilling of applied and sustained
thought, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second
jhana... That surmounts it. But that too, I say, is not enough.
Abandon it, I say; surmount it, I say. And what surmounts it?

28. "Here, Udayin, with the fading away as well of rapture... a
bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the third jhana... That sur-
mounts it. But that too, I say, is not enough. Abandon it, I say;
surmount it, I say. And what surmounts it?

29. "Here, Udayin, with the abandoning of pleasure and
pain... a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the fourth jhana...
That surmounts it. But that too, I say, is not enough. Abandon it,
I say; surmount it, I say. And what surmounts it?

30. "Here, Udayin, with the complete surmounting of percep-
tions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of sensory
impact, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, aware
that 'space is infinite/ a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the
base of infinite space. That surmounts it. But that too, I say, is
not enough. Abandon it, I say; surmount it, I say. And what sur-
mounts it?

31. "Here, Udayin, by completely surmounting the base of
infinite space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite,' a bhikkhu
enters upon and abides in the base of infinite consciousness.
That surmounts it. But that too, I say, is not enough. Abandon it,
I say; surmount it, I say. And what surmounts it?

32. "Here, Udayin, by completely surmounting the base of
infinite consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing/ a bhikkhu
enters upon and abides in the base of nothingness. That sur-
mounts it. But that too, I say, is not enough. Abandon it, I say;
surmount it, I say. And what surmounts it?

33. "Here, Udayin, by completely surmounting the base of
nothingness, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the base of
neither-perception-nor-non-perception. [456] That surmounts it.
But that too, I say, is not enough. Abandon it, I say; surmount it,
I say. And what surmounts it?

34. "Here, Udayin, by completely surmounting the base of
neither-perception-nor-non-perception, a bhikkhu enters upon


i 456


The Simile of the Quail 559


and abides in the cessation of perception and feeling. 681 That
surmounts it. Thus I speak of the abandoning even of the base of
neither-perception-nor-non-perception. Do you see, Udayin, any
fetter, small or great, of whose abandoning I do not speak?"

"No, venerable sir."

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Udayin was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


67 Catuma Sutta
At Catuma


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Catuma in a myrobalan grove.

2. Now on that occasion five hundred bhikkhus headed by the
venerable Sariputta and the venerable Maha Moggallana had
come to Catuma to see the Blessed One. While the visiting
bhikkhus were exchanging greetings with the resident bhik-
khus, and were preparing resting places and putting away their
bowls and outer robes, they were very loud and noisy.

3. Then the Blessed One addressed the venerable Ananda
thus: "Ananda, who are these loud noisy people? One would
think they were fishermen hawking fish." 682

"Venerable sir, they are five hundred bhikkhus headed by
Sariputta and Moggallana who have come to Catuma to see the
Blessed One. And while the visiting bhikkhus were exchanging
greetings with the resident bhikkhus, and were preparing rest-
ing places and putting away their bowls and outer robes, they
have been very loud and noisy."

4. "Then, Ananda, tell those bhikkhus in my name that the
Teacher calls the venerable ones."

"Yes, venerable sir," he replied, and he went to those
bhikkhus and told them: "The Teacher calls the venerable ones."

"Yes, friend," they [457] replied, and they went to the Blessed
One, and after paying homage to him, sat down at one side.
When they had done so, the Blessed One asked them:
"Bhikkhus, why are you so loud and noisy? One would think
you were fishermen hawking fish."

"Venerable sir, we are five hundred bhikkhus headed by
Sariputta and Moggallana who have come to Catuma to see the
Blessed One. And it was while we visiting bhikkhus were
exchanging greetings with the resident bhikkhus, and were


560


i 458


At Catuma 561


preparing resting places and putting away our bowls and outer
robes, that we were very loud and noisy."

5. "Go, bhikkhus, I dismiss you. You cannot live with me."

"Yes, venerable sir," they replied, and they rose from their

seats, and after paying homage to the Blessed One, keeping him
on their right, they put away the things in their resting places,
and taking their bowls and outer robes, they departed.

6. Now on that occasion the Sakyans of Catuma had met
together in their assembly hall for some business or other.
Seeing the bhikkhus coming in the distance, they went to them
and asked: "Where are you going, venerable sirs?"

"Friends, the Sangha of bhikkhus has been dismissed by the
Blessed One."

"Then let the venerable ones be seated awhile. Perhaps we
shall be able to restore his confidence."

"Yes, friends," they replied.

7. Then the Sakyans of Catuma went to the Blessed One, and
after paying homage to him, they sat down at one side and said:

"Venerable sir, let the Blessed One delight in the Sangha of
bhikkhus; venerable sir, let the Blessed One welcome the Sangha
of bhikkhus; venerable sir, let the Blessed One show compassion
towards the Sangha of bhikkhus now as he used to show com-
passion towards it in the past. Venerable sir, there are new
bhikkhus here, just gone forth, recently come to this Dhamma
and Discipline. If they get no opportunity to see the Blessed
One, there may take place in them some change or alteration.
Venerable sir, just as when young seedlings get no water there
may take place in them some change or alteration, so too, vener-
able sir, there are [458] new bhikkhus here, just gone forth,
recently come to this Dhamma and Discipline. If they get no
opportunity to see the Blessed One, there may take place in
them some change or alteration. Venerable sir, just as when a
young calf does not see its mother there may take place in it
some change or alteration, so too, venerable sir, there are new
bhikkhus here, just gone forth, recently come to this Dhamma
and Discipline. If they get no opportunity to see the Blessed
One, there may take place in them some change or alteration.
Venerable sir, let the Blessed One delight in the Sangha of the
bhikkhus; venerable sir, let the Blessed One welcome the Sangha
of bhikkhus; venerable sir, let the Blessed One show compassion



towards the Sangha of bhikkhus now as he used to show com-
passion towards it in the past."

8. Then the Brahma Sahampati 683 knew with his mind the
thought in the Blessed One's mind, so just as quickly as a strong
man might extend his flexed arm or flex his extended arm, he
vanished in the Brahma-world and appeared before the Blessed
One. Then he arranged his upper robe on one shoulder, and
extending his hands in reverential salutation towards the
Blessed One, he said;

9. "Venerable sir, let the Blessed One delight in the Sangha of
bhikkhus; venerable sir, let the Blessed One welcome the Sangha
of bhikkhus ;... (as in §7)... [459] now as he used to show compas-
sion towards it in the past."

10. The Sakyans of Catuma and the Brahma Sahampati were
able to restore the Blessed One's confidence with the similes of
the seedlings and the young calf.

11. Then the venerable Maha Moggallana addressed the
bhikkhus thus; "Get up, friends, take your bowls and outer
robes. The Blessed One's confidence has been restored by the
Sakyans of Catuma and the Brahma Sahampati with the similes
of the seedlings and the young calf."

12. "Yes, friend," they replied, and taking their bowls and outer
robes, they went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to
him, sat down at one side. When they had done so, the Blessed
One asked the venerable Sariputta: "What did you think,
Sariputta, when the Sangha of bhikkhus wasdismissed by me?"

"Venerable sir, I thdught thus: The Sangha of bhikkhus has
been dismissed by the Blessed One. The Blessed One will now
abide inactive, devoted to pleasant abiding here and now; and
we too shall now abide inactive, devoted to pleasant abiding
here and now.'"

"Stop, Sariputta, stop! Such a thought should not be enter-
tained by you again." 684

13. Then the Blessed One addressed the venerable Maha
Moggallana: "What did you think, Moggallana, when the
Sangha of bhikkhus was dismissed by me?"

"Venerable sir, I thought thus: 'The Sangha of bhikkhus has
been dismissed by the Blessed One. The Blessed One will now
abide inactive, devoted to pleasant abiding here and now. Now
the venerable Sariputta and I shall lead the Sangha of bhikkhus.'"



i 460


At Catuma 563


"Good, good, Moggallana! Either I shall lead the Sangha of
bhikkhus or else Sariputta and Moggallana shall lead it."

14. Then the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus:

"Bhikkhus, there are these four kinds of fears to be expected

by those who go down to the water. 685 What are the four? They
are: fear of waves, fear of crocodiles, fear of whirlpools, and fear
of sharks. These are the four kinds of fears to be expected by
those who go down to the water.

15. "So too, bhikkhus, there are four kinds of fears to be
expected by certain persons who have gone forth from the home
life into homelessness in this Dhamma and Discipline. What are
[460] the four? They are: fear of waves, fear of crocodiles, fear of
whirlpools, and fear of sharks.

16. "What, bhikkhus, is fear of waves? Here some clansman
goes forth out of faith from the home life into homelessness,
considering: 'I am a victim of birth, ageing, and death, of sor-
row, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair; I am a victim of suf-
fering, a prey to suffering. Surely an ending of this whole mass
of suffering can be known.' Then, after he has gone forth thus,
his companions in the holy life advise and instruct him thus:
'You should move to and fro thus; you should look ahead and
look away thus; you should flex and extend the limbs thus; you
should wear the patched cloak, bowl, and robes thus.' Then he
thinks: 'Formerly, when we were in the home life, we advised
and instructed others, and now these [bhikkhus], who seem like
they might be our sons or our grandsons, think that they can
advise and instruct us.' And so he forsakes the training and
reverts to the low life. He is called one who has forsaken the
training and reverted to the low life because he was frightened
by the fear of waves. Now 'waves' is a term for angry despair.

17. "What, bhikkhus, is fear of crocodiles? Here some clansman
goes forth out of faith from the home life into homelessness, con-
sidering: 'I am a victim of birth, ageing, and death, of sorrow,
lamentation, pain, grief, and despair; I am a victim of suffering, a
prey to suffering. Surely an ending of this whole mass of suffer-
ing can be known.' Then, after he has gone forth thus, his com-
panions in the holy life advise and instruct him thus: 'This can be
consumed by you, this cannot be consumed by you; this can be
eaten by you, this cannot be eaten by you; this can be tasted by
you, this cannot be tasted by you; this can be drunk by you, this.


564 Catuma Sutta: Sutta 67


i 461


cannot be drunk by you. 686 You can consume what is allowable,
you cannot consume what is not allowable; you can eat what is
allowable, you cannot eat what is not allowable; you can taste
what is allowable, you cannot taste what is not allowable; you
can drink what is allowable, you cannot drink what is not allow-
able. You can consume food within the proper time, you cannot
consume food outside the proper time; you can eat within the
proper time, you cannot eat outside the proper time; you can
taste food within the proper time, you cannot taste food outside
the proper time; you can drink within the proper time, you can-
not drink outside the proper time.' 687 [461]

"Then he thinks: 'Formerly, when we were in the home life,
we consumed what we liked and did not consume what we did
not like; we ate what we liked and did not eat what we did not
like; we tasted what we liked and did not taste what we did not
like; we drank what we liked and did not drink what we did not
like. We consumed what was allowable and what was not
allowable; we ate what was allowable and what was not allow-
able; we tasted what was allowable and what was not allowable;
we drank what was allowable and what was not allowable. We
consumed food within the proper time and outside the proper
time; we ate within the proper time and outside the proper time;
we tasted food within the proper time and outside the proper
time; we drank within the proper time and outside the proper
time. Now, when faithful householders give us good food of
various kinds during thy day outside the proper time, it seems
these [bhikkhus] put a muzzle on our mouths.' And so he for-
sakes the training and reverts to the low life. He is called one
who has forsaken the training and reverted to the low life
because he was frightened by the fear of crocodiles. Now 'croco-
diles' is a term for gluttony.

18. "What, bhikkhus, is fear of whirlpools? Here some clans-
man goes forth out of faith from the home life into homeless-
ness, considering: 'I am a victim of birth, ageing, and death, of
sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair; I am a victim of
suffering, a prey to suffering. Surely an ending of this whole
mass of suffering can be known.' Then, after he has gone forth
thus, when it is morning he dresses, and taking his bowl and
outer robe, he goes into a village or town for alms with his body
unguarded, with his speech unguarded, with mindfulness


i 462


At Catuma 565


unestablished, and with sense faculties unrestrained. He sees
some householder there or householder's son furnished and
endowed with the five cords of sensual pleasure enjoying him-
self with them. He considers thus: 'Formerly, when we were in
the home life, we were furnished and endowed with the five
cords of sensual pleasure and we enjoyed ourselves with them.
My family has wealth; I can both enjoy wealth and make merit.'
And so he forsakes the training and reverts to the low life. He is
called one who has forsaken the training and reverted to the low
life because he was frightened by the fear of whirlpools. Now
'whirlpools' is a term for the five cords of sensual pleasure.

19. "What, bhikkhus, is fear of sharks? Here [462] some clans-
man goes forth out of faith from the home life into homeless-
ness, considering: 'I am a victim of birth, ageing, and death, of
sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair; 1 am a victim of
suffering, a prey to suffering. Surely an ending of this whole
mass of suffering can be known.' Then, after he has gone forth
thus, when it is morning he dresses, and taking his bowl and
outer robe, he goes into a village or town for alms with his body
unguarded, with his speech unguarded, with mindfulness
unestablished, and with sense faculties unrestrained. He sees a
woman there lightly clothed, lightly dressed. When he sees such
a woman, lust infects his mind. Because his mind has been
infected by lust, he forsakes the training and reverts to the low
life. He is called one who has forsaken the training and reverted
to the low life because he was frightened by the fear of sharks.
Now 'sharks' is a term for women.

20. "Bhikkhus, these are the four kinds of fears to be expected
by certain persons who have gone forth from the home life into
homelessness in this Dhamma and Discipline."

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.




il


68 Nalakapana Sutta
At Nalakapana


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing in the Kosalan country at Nalakapana in the Palasa Grove.

2. Now on that occasion many very well-known clansmen had
gone forth out of faith from the home life into homelessness
under the Blessed One - the venerable Anuruddha, the vener-
able Nandiya, the venerable Kimbila, the venerable Bhagu, the
venerable Kundadhana, the venerable Revata, the venerable
Ananda, and other very well-known clansmen.

3. And on that occasion the Blessed One was [463] seated in the
open surrounded by the Sangha of bhikkhus. Then, referring to
those clansmen, he addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus, those
clansmen who have gone forth out of faith from the home life
into homelessness under me - do they delight in the holy life?"

When this was said, those bhikkhus were silent.

A second and a third time, referring to those clansmen, he
addressed the bhikkhus; thus: "Bhikkhus, those clansmen who
have gone forth out of faith from the home life into homeless-
ness under me - do they delight in the holy life?"

For a second and third time, those bhikkhus were silent.

4. Then the Blessed One considered thus: "Suppose I question
those clansmen?"

Then he addressed the venerable Anuruddha thus: "Anu-
ruddha, do you all delight in the holy life?"

"Surely, venerable sir, we delight in the holy life."

5. "Good, good, Anuruddha! It is proper for all you clansmen
who have gone forth out of faith from the home life into home-
lessness to delight in the holy life. As you are still endowed with
the blessing of youth, black-haired young men in the prime of
life, you could have indulged in sensual pleasures, yet you have
gone forth from the home life into homelessness. It is not because


566


i 464


At Nafokapana 567


you have been driven by kings that you have gone forth from the
home life into homelessness, or because you have been driven by
thieves, or owing to debt, fear, or want of a livelihood. Rather,
did you not go forth out of faith from the home life into home-
lessness after considering thus: 'I am a victim of birth, ageing,
and death, of sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair; I am
a victim of suffering, a prey to suffering. Surely an ending of this
whole mass of suffering can be known'?" - "Yes, venerable sir."

6. "What should be done, Anuruddha, by a clansman who has
gone forth thus? While he still does not attain to the rapture and
pleasure that are secluded from sensual pleasures and secluded
from unwholesome states, or to something more peaceful than
that, 688 covetousness invades his mind and remains, ill will
invades his mind and remains, sloth and torpor invade his mind
and remain, restlessness and remorse invade his mind and
remain, doubt invades [464] his mind and remains, discontent
invades his mind and remains, weariness invades his mind and
remains. That is so while he still does not attain to the rapture
and pleasure that are secluded from sensual pleasures and
secluded from unwholesome states, or to something more
peaceful than that. When he attains to the rapture and pleasure
that are secluded from sensual pleasures and secluded from
unwholesome states, or to something more peaceful than that,
covetousness does not invade his mind and remain, ill will...
sloth and torpor... restlessness and remorse. ..doubt. ..discon-
tent... weariness does not invade his mind and remain. That is
so when he attains to the rapture and pleasure that are secluded
from sensual pleasures and secluded from unwholesome states,
or to something more peaceful than that.

7. "How then, Anuruddha, do you all think of me in this way:
'The Tathagata has not abandoned the taints that defile, bring
renewal of being, give trouble, ripen in suffering, and lead to
future birth, ageing, and death. That is why the Tathagata uses
one thing after reflecting, endures another thing after reflecting,
avoids another thing after reflecting, and removes another thing
after reflecting'?" 689

"No, venerable sir, we do not think of the Blessed One in that
way. We think of the Blessed One in this way: 'The Tathagata has
abandoned the taints that defile, bring renewal of being, give
trouble, ripen in suffering, and lead to future birth, ageing, and



568 Nalakapana Sutta: Sutta 68


i 465


death. That is why the Tathagata uses one thing after reflecting,
endures another thing after reflecting, avoids another thing after
reflecting, and removes another thing after reflecting."

"Good, good, Anuruddha! The Tathagata has abandoned the
taints that defile, bring renewal of being, give trouble, ripen in suf-
fering, and lead to future birth, ageing, and death; he has cut them
off at the root, made them like a palm stump, done away with
them so that they are no longer subject to future arising. Just as a
palm tree whose crown is cut off is incapable of further growth, so
too, the Tathagata has abandoned the taints that defile... cut them
off at the root, made them like a palm stump, done away with
them so that they are no longer subject to future arising.

8. "What do you think, Anuruddha? What purpose does the
Tathagata see that when a disciple has died, he declares his reap-
pearance thus: 'So-and-so has reappeared in such-and-such a place;
so-and-so has reappeared in such-and-such a place '?" 690 [465]

"Venerable sir, our teachings are rooted in the Blessed One,
guided by the Blessed One, have the Blessed One as their resort.
It would be good if the Blessed One would explain the meaning
of these words. Having heard it from the Blessed One, the
bhikkhus will remember it."

9. "Anuruddha, it is not for the purpose of scheming to
deceive people or for the purpose of flattering people or for the
purpose of gain, honour, or renown, or with the thought, 'Let
people know me to be thus/ that when a disciple has died, the
Tathagata declares his reappearance thus: 'So-and-so has reap-
peared in such-and-such a place; so-and-so has reappeared in
such-and-such a place.' Rather, it is because there are faithful
clansmen inspired and gladdened by what is lofty, who when
they hear that, direct their minds to such a state, and that leads
to their welfare and happiness for a long time.

10. "Here a bhikkhu hears thus: 'The bhikkhu named so-and-
so has died; the Blessed One has declared of him: "He was
established in final knowledge."' 691 And he has either seen that
venerable one for himself or heard it said of him: 'That venera-
ble one's virtue was thus, his state [of concentration] was thus,
his wisdom was thus, his abiding [in attainments] was thus, his
deliverance was thus.' Recollecting his faith, virtue, learning,
generosity, and wisdom, he directs his mind to such a state. In
this way a bhikkhu has a comfortable abiding.


i 466


At Nalakapana 569


11. "Here a bhikkhu hears thus: 'The bhikkhu named so-and-
so has died; the Blessed One has declared of him: "With the
destruction of the five lower fetters he has reappeared sponta-
neously [in the Pure Abodes] and there will attain final Nibbana
without ever returning from that world."' And he has either
seen that venerable one for himself... he directs his mind to such
a state. In this way too a bhikkhu has a comfortable abiding.

12. "Here a bhikkhu hears thus: 'The bhikkhu named so-and-
so has died; the Blessed One has declared of him: "With the
destruction of three fetters and with the attenuation of lust,
hate, and delusion, he has become a once-returner, returning
once to this world to make an end of suffering."' And he has
either seen that venerable one for himself. . . [466] he directs his
mind to such a state. In this way too a bhikkhu has a comfort-
able abiding.

13. "Here a bhikkhu hears thus: "The bhikkhu named so-and-
so has died; the Blessed One has declared of him: "With the
destruction of three fetters he has become a stream-enterer, no
longer subject to perdition, bound [for deliverance], headed for
enlightenment.'" And he has either seen that venerable one for
himself... he directs his mind to such a state. In this way too a
bhikkhu has a comfortable abiding.

14. "Here a bhikkhunl hears thus: 'The bhikkhunl named so-
and-so has died; the Blessed One has declared of her: "She was
established in final knowledge.'" And she has either seen that
sister for herself or heard it said of her: 'That sister's virtue was
thus, her state [of concentration] was thus, her wisdom was
thus, her abiding [in attainments] was thus, her deliverance was
thus.' Recollecting her faith, virtue, learning, generosity, and
wisdom, she directs her mind to such a state. In this way a
bhikkhunl has a comfortable abiding.

15. "Here a bhikkhunl hears thus: 'The bhikkhunl named so-
and-so has died; the Blessed One has declared of her: "With the
destruction of the five lower fetters she has reappeared sponta-
neously [in the Pure Abodes] and will there attain final Nibbana
without ever returning from that world.". . .

16. "'He has declared of her: "With the destruction of three
fetters and with the attenuation of lust, hate, and delusion, she
has become a once-returner, returning once to this world to
make an end of suffering."...


570 Nalakapana Sutta: Sutta 68


i 468


17. "'He has declared of her: "With the destruction of three
fetters she has become a stream-enterer, no longer subject to
perdition, bound [for deliverance], headed for enlightenment.'"
[467] And she has either seen that sister for herself... she directs
her mind to such a state. In this way too a bhikkhunl has a com-
fortable abiding.

18. "Here a man lay follower hears thus: 'The man lay follow-
er named so-and-so has died; the Blessed One has declared of
him: "With the destruction of the five lower fetters he has reap-
peared spontaneously [in the Pure Abodes] and will there attain
final Nibbana without ever returning from that world.". . .

19. "'He has declared of him: "With the destruction of three
fetters and with the attenuation of lust, hate, and delusion, he
has become a once-returner, returning once to this world to
make an end of suffering.". . .

20. "'He has declared of him: "With the destruction of three
fetters he has become a stream-enterer, no longer subject to
perdition, bound [for deliverance], headed for enlightenment.'"
And he has either seen that venerable one for himself or heard it
said of him: 'That venerable one's virtue was thus, his state [of
concentration] was thus, his wisdom was thus, his abiding [in
attainments] was thus, his deliverance was thus.' Recollecting
his faith, virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom, he directs his
mind to such a state. In this way too a man lay follower has a
comfortable abiding.

21. "Here a woman lay follower hears thus: 'The woman lay
follower named so-and-so has died; the Blessed One has
declared of her: "With the destruction of the five lower fetters
she has reappeared spontaneously [in the Pure Abodes] and will
there attain final Nibbana without ever returning from that
world." [468]...

22. "'He has declared of her: "With the destruction of three
fetters and with the attenuation of lust, hate, and delusion, she
has become a once-returner, returning once to this world to
make an end of suffering.". ..

23. "'He has declared of her: "With the destruction of three
fetters she has become a stream-enterer, no longer subject to
perdition, bound [for deliverance], headed for enlightenment.'"
And she has either seen that sister for herself or heard it said of
her: 'That sister's virtue was thus, her state [of concentration]


i 468


At Nalakapana 571


was thus, her wisdom was thus, her abiding [in attainments]
was thus, her deliverance was thus.' Recollecting her faith,
virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom, she directs her mind
to such a state. In this way too a woman lay follower has a com-
fortable abiding.

24. "So, Anuruddha, it is not for the purpose of scheming to
deceive people or for the purpose of flattering people or for the
purpose of gain, honour, and renown, or with the thought, 'Let
people know me to be thus,' that when a disciple has died, the
Tathagata declares his reappearance thus: 'So-and-so has reap-
peared in such-and-such a place; so-and-so has reappeared in
such-and-such a place.' Rather, it is because there are faithful
clansmen inspired and gladdened by what is lofty, who when
they hear that, direct their minds to such a state, and that leads
to their welfare and happiness for a long time."

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Anuruddha
was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


69 Gulissani Sutta
Gulissani


[469] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One
was living at Rajagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels'
Sanctuary.

2. Now on that occasion a bhikkhu named Gulissani, a forest-
dweller of lax behaviour, had come on a visit to stay in the
midst of the Sangha for some business or other. The venerable
Sariputta addressed the bhikkhus with reference to the bhikkhu
Gulissani thus:

3. "Friends, when a forest-dwelling bhikkhu comes to the
Sangha and is living in the Sangha, he should be respectful and
deferential towards his companions in the holy life. If he is dis-
respectful and undeferential towards his companions in the holy
life, there will be those who would say of him: 'What has this
venerable forest-dweller gained by his dwelling alone in the for-
est, doing as he likes, since he is disrespectful and undeferential
towards his companions in the holy life?' Since there would be
those who would say this of him, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu
who has come to the Sangha and is living in the Sangha should
be respectful and deferential towards his companions in the
holy life.

4. "When a forest-dwelling bhikkhu comes to the Sangha and
is living in the Sangha, he should be skilled in good behaviour
regarding seats thus: 'I shall sit down in such a way that I do not
encroach upon elder bhikkhus and do not deny new bhikkhus a
seat.' If he is not skilled in good behaviour regarding seats, there
will be those who would say of him: 'What has this venerable
forest-dweller gained by his dwelling alone in the forest, doing
as he likes, since he does not even know what pertains to good
behaviour?' Since there would be those who would say this of
him, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu who has come to the Sangha and


572


i 470


Gulissani 573


is living in the Sangha should be skilled in good behaviour
regarding seats.

5. "When a forest-dwelling bhikkhu comes to the Sangha and
is living in the Sangha, he should not enter the village too early
or return late in the day. If he enters the village too early and
returns late in the day, there will be those who would say of
him: 'What has this venerable forest-dweller gained by his
dwelling alone in the forest, doing as he likes, since he enters the
village too early and returns late in the day?' Since there would
be those who would say this of him, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu
who has come to the Sangha and is living in the Sangha should
not enter the village too early or return late in the day.

6. "When a forest-dwelling bhikkhu comes to the Sangha and
is living in the Sangha, [470] he should not go before the meal or
after the meal to visit families. 692 If he goes before the meal or
after the meal to visit families, there will be those who would
say of him: 'Surely this venerable forest-dweller, while dwelling
alone in the forest, doing as he likes, must be used to making
untimely visits, since he behaves thus when he has come to the
Sangha.' Since there would be those who would say this of him,
a forest-dwelling bhikkhu who has come to the Sangha and is
living in the Sangha should not go before the meal or after the
meal to visit families.

7. "When a forest-dwelling bhikkhu comes to the Sangha and
is living in the Sangha, he should not be haughty and personally
vain. If he is haughty and personally vain, there will be those
who would say of him: 'Surely this venerable forest-dweller,
while dwelling alone in the forest, doing as he likes, must gener-
ally be haughty and personally vain, since he behaves thus
when he has come to the Sangha.' Since there would be those
who would say this of him, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu who has
come to the Sangha and is living in the Sangha should not be
haughty and personally vain.

8. "When a forest-dwelling bhikkhu comes to the Sangha and is
living in the Sangha, he should not be rough-tongued and loose-
spoken. If he is rough-tongued and loose-spoken, there will be
those who would say of him: 'What has this venerable forest-
dweller gained by his dwelling alone in the forest, doing as he
likes, since he is rough-tongued and loose-spoken?' Since there
would be those who would say this of him, a forest-dwelling


574 Gulissani Sutta: Sutta 69


i 471


bhikkhu who has come to the Sangha and is living in the Sangha
should not be rough-tongued and loose-spoken.

9. "When a forest-dwelling bhikkhu comes to the Sangha and
is living in the Sangha, he should be easy to correct and should
associate with good friends. If he is difficult to correct and asso-
ciates with bad friends, there will be those who would say of
him: 'What has this venerable forest-dweller gained by his
dwelling alone in the forest, doing as he likes, since he is diffi-
cult to correct and associates with bad friends?' Since there
would be those who would say this of him, a forest-dwelling
bhikkhu who has come to the Sangha and is living in the
Sangha should be easy to correct and should associate with
good friends.

10. "A forest-dwelling bhikkhu should guard the doors of his
sense faculties. If he does not guard the doors of his sense facul-
ties, there will be those who would say of him: 'What has this
venerable forest-dweller gained by his dwelling alone in the for-
est, doing as he likes, since [471] he does not guard the doors of
his sense faculties?' Since there would be those who would say
this of him, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu should guard the doors of
his sense faculties.

11. "A forest-dwelling bhikkhu should be moderate in eating. If
he is not moderate in eating, there will be those who would say of
him: 'What has this venerable forest-dweller gained by his
dwelling alone in the forest, doing as he likes, since he is not mod-
erate in eating?' Since there would be those who would say this of
him, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu should be moderate in eating.

12. "A forest-dwelling bhikkhu should be devoted to wakeful-
ness. If he is not devoted to wakefulness, there will be those
would say of him: 'What has this venerable forest-dweller
gained by his dwelling alone in the forest, doing as he likes,
since he is not devoted to wakefulness?' Since there would be
those who would say this of him, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu
should be devoted to wakefulness.

13. "A forest-dwelling bhikkhu should be energetic. If he is
not energetic, there will be those who would say of him: 'What
has this venerable forest-dweller gained by his dwelling alone in
the forest, doing as he likes, since he is lazy?' Since there would
be those who would say this of him, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu
should be energetic.


i 472


Gulissani 575


14. "A forest-dwelling bhikkhu should be established in mind-
fulness. If he is unmindful, there will be those who would say of
him: 'What has this venerable forest-dweller gained by his
dwelling alone in the forest, doing as he likes, since he is unmind-
ful?' Since there would be those who would say this of him, a
forest-dwelling bhikkhu should be established in mindfulness.

15. "A forest-dwelling bhikkhu should be concentrated. If he
is not concentrated, there will be those who would say of him:
'What has this venerable forest-dweller gained by his dwelling
alone in the forest, doing as he likes, since he is not concentrated?'
Since there would be those who would say this of him, a forest-
dwelling bhikkhu should be concentrated.

16. "A forest-dwelling bhikkhu should be wise. If he is not
wise, there will be [472] those who would say of him: 'What has
this venerable forest-dweller gained by his dwelling alone in the
forest, doing as he likes, since he is not wise?' Since there would
be those who would say this of him, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu
should be wise.

17. "A forest-dwelling bhikkhu should apply himself to the
higher Dhamma and the higher Discipline. 693 If he does not
apply himself to the higher Dhamma and the higher Dis-
cipline, there will be those who would say of him: 'What has
this venerable forest-dweller gained by his dwelling alone in
the forest, doing as he likes, since he does not apply himself to
the higher Dhamma and the higher Discipline?' Since there
would be those who would say this of him, a forest-dwelling
bhikkhu should apply himself to the higher Dhamma and the
higher Discipline.

18. "A forest-dwelling bhikkhu should apply himself to those
liberations that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending.
forms; 694 for there are those who ask a forest-dwelling bhikkhu
questions on the liberations that are peaceful and immaterial,
transcending forms. If he does not apply himself to those liber-
ations, there will be those who would say of him: 'What has
this venerable forest-dweller gained by his dwelling alone in
the forest, doing as he likes, since he does not apply himself to
those liberations that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending
forms?' Since there would be those who would say this of him, a
forest-dwelling bhikkhu should apply himself to those libera-
tions that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending forms.


576 Gulissani Sutta: Sutta 69


i 473


19. "A forest-dwelling bhikkhu should apply himself to super-
human states, for there are those who ask a forest-dwelling
bhikkhu questions on the superhuman states. 695 If he does not
apply himself to those states, there will be those who would say
of him: 'What has this venerable forest-dweller gained by his
dwelling alone in the forest, doing as he likes, since he does not
apply himself to superhuman states?' Since there would be
those who would say this of him, a forest-dwelling bhikkhu
should apply himself to superhuman states."

20. When this was said, the venerable Maha Moggallana asked
the venerable Sariputta: "Friend Sariputta, should these things
be undertaken and practised only by a forest-dwelling bhikkhu
or [473] by a town-dwelling bhikkhu as well?"

"Friend Moggallana, these things should be undertaken and
practised not only by a forest-dwelling bhikkhu, but by a town-
dwelling bhikkhu as well."


70 Kitagiri Sutta
At Kitagiri


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was
wandering in the Kasi country together with a large Sangha of
bhikkhus. There he addressed the bhikkhus thus:

2. "Bhikkhus, I abstain from eating at night. By so doing, I am
free from illness and affliction, and I enjoy health, strength, and
a comfortable abiding. Come, bhikkhus, abstain from eating at
night. By so doing, you too will be free from illness and afflic-
tion, and you will enjoy health, strength, and a comfortable
abiding." 696

"Yes, venerable sir," they replied.

3. Then, as the Blessed One was wandering by stages in the
Kasi country, he eventually arrived at a Kasi town called Kita-
giri. There he lived in this Kasi town, Kitagiri.

4. Now on that occasion the bhikkhus named Assaji and
Punabbasuka were residing at Kitagiri. 697 Then a number of
bhikkhus went and told them: "Friends, the Blessed One and the
Sangha of bhikkhus now abstain from eating at night. By so
doing, they are free from illness and affliction, and they enjoy
health, strength, and a comfortable abiding. Come, friends,
abstain from eating at night. By so doing, you too will be free,
from illness and affliction, and you will enjoy health, strength,
and a comfortable abiding." [474] When this was said, the
bhikkhus Assaji and Punabbasuka told those bhikkhus:
"Friends, we eat in the evening, in the morning, and in the day
outside the proper time. By so doing, we are free from illness
and affliction, and we enjoy health, strength, and a comfortable
abiding. Why should we abandon [a benefit] visible here and
now to pursue [a benefit to be achieved] at a future time? We
shall eat in the evening, in the morning, and in the day outside
the proper time."


577


578 Kitagiri Sutta: Sutta 70


i 475


5. Since the bhikkhus were unable to convince the bhikkhus
Assaji and Punabbasuka, they went to the Blessed One. After
paying homage to him, they sat down at one side and told him
all that had occurred, adding: "Venerable sir, since we were
unable to convince the bhikkhus Assaji and Punabbasuka, we
have reported this matter to the Blessed One."

6. Then the Blessed One addressed a certain bhikkhu thus:
"Come, bhikkhu, tell the bhikkhus Assaji and Punabbasuka in
my name that the Teacher calls them."

"Yes, venerable sir," he replied, and he went to the bhikkhus
Assaji and Punabbasuka and told them: "The Teacher calls
you, friends."

"Yes, friend," they replied, and they went to the Blessed One,
and after paying homage to him, sat down at one side. The
Blessed One then said: "Bhikkhus, is it true that when a number
of bhikkhus went and told you: 'Friends, the Blessed One and the
Sangha now abstain from eating at night. . .Come, friends, abstain
from eating at night [475]...,' you told those bhikkhus: 'Friends,
we eat in the evening... Why should we abandon [a benefit] visi-
ble here and now to pursue [a benefit to be achieved] at a future
time? We shall eat in the evening, in the morning, and in the day
outside the proper time'?" - "Yes, venerable sir."

"Bhikkhus, have you known me to teach the Dhamma in such
a way as this: 'Whatever this person experiences, whether pleas-
ant or painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant, unwholesome
states diminish in him and wholesome states increase'?" 698 -
"No, venerable sir."

7. "Bhikkhus, have you not known me to teach the Dhamma
in such a way as this: 'Here, when someone feels a certain kind
of pleasant feeling, unwholesome states increase in him and
wholesome states diminish; but when someone feels another
kind of pleasant feeling, unwholesome states diminish in him
and wholesome states increase. 699 Here, when someone feels a
certain kind of painful feeling, unwholesome states increase in
him and wholesome states diminish; but when someone feels
another kind of painful feeling, unwholesome states diminish in
him and wholesome states increase. Here, when someone feels a
certain kind of neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, unwhole-
some states increase in him and wholesome states diminish; but
when someone feels another kind of neither-painful-nor-pleasant


i 476


At Kitagiri 579


feeling, unwholesome states diminish in him and wholesome
states increase'?" - "Yes, venerable sir."

8. "Good, bhikkhus. 700 And if it were unknown by me, unseen,
unfound, unrealised, uncontacted by wisdom thus: 'Here, when
someone feels a certain kind of pleasant feeling, unwholesome
states increase in him and wholesome states diminish,' would it
be fitting for me, not knowing that, to say: 'Abandon such a
kind of pleasant feeling'?" - "No, venerable sir."

"But because it is known by me, seen, found, realised, contacted
by wisdom thus: 'Here, when someone feels a certain kind of
pleasant feeling [476], unwholesome states increase in him and
wholesome states diminish/ that I therefore say: 'Abandon such
a kind of pleasant feeling.'

"If it were unknown by me, unseen, unfound, unrealised,
uncontacted by wisdom thus: 'Here, when someone feels another
kind of pleasant feeling, unwholesome states diminish in him
and wholesome states increase/ would it be fitting for me, not
knowing that, to say: 'Enter upon and abide in such a kind of
pleasant feeling'?" - "No, venerable sir."

"But because it is known by me, seen, found, realised, contacted
by wisdom thus: 'Here, when someone feels another kind of
pleasant feeling, unwholesome states diminish in him and
wholesome states increase/ that I therefore say: 'Enter upon and
abide in such a kind of pleasant feeling.'

9. "If it were unknown by me... But because it is known by
me... contacted by wisdom thus: 'Here, when someone feels a
certain kind of painful feeling, unwholesome states increase in
him and wholesome states diminish,' that I therefore say:
'Abandon such a kind of painful feeling.'

"If it were unknown by me... But because it is known by
me... contacted by wisdom thus: 'Here, when someone feels
another kind of painful feeling, unwholesome states diminish in
him and wholesome states increase/ that I therefore say: 'Enter
upon and abide in such a kind of painful feeling.'

10. "If it were unknown by me... But because it is known by
me... contacted by wisdom thus: 'Here, when someone feels a
certain kind of neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, unwhole-
some states increase in him and wholesome states diminish/
that I therefore say: 'Abandon such a kind of neither-painful-
nor-pleasant feeling.'


580 Kitagiri Sutta: Sutta 70


i 477


"If it were unknown by me... But because it is known by
me... contacted by wisdom thus: 'Here, when someone feels
another kind of neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, unwhole-
some states diminish in him and wholesome states increase,'
that I therefore say: [477] 'Enter upon and abide in such a kind
of neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling.'

11. "Bhikkhus, I do not say of all bhikkhus that they still have
work to do with diligence; nor do I say of all bhikkhus that they
have no more work to do with diligence.

12. "I do not say of those bhikkhus who are arahants with
taints destroyed, who have lived the holy life, done what had to
be done, laid down the burden, reached the true goal, destroyed
the fetters of being, and are completely liberated through final
knowledge, that they still have work to do with diligence. Why
is that? They have done their work with diligence; they are no
more capable of being negligent.

13. "I say of such bhikkhus who are in higher training, whose
minds have not yet reached the goal, and who are still aspiring
to the supreme security from bondage, that they still have work
to do with diligence. Why is that? Because when those venerable
ones make use of suitable resting places and associate with good
friends and balance their spiritual faculties, they may by realis-
ing for themselves with direct knowledge here and now enter
upon and abide in that supreme goal of the holy life for the sake
of which clansmen rightly go forth from the home life into
homelessness. Seeing this fruit of diligence for these bhikkhus, I
say that they still have work to do with diligence.

14. "Bhikkhus, there are seven kinds of persons to be found
existing in the world. 701 What seven? They are: one liberated-in-
both ways, one liberated-by-wisdom, a body-witness, one
attained-to-view, one liberated-by-faith, a Dhamma-follower,
and a faith-follower.

15. "What kind of person is one liberated-in-both-ways? Here
some person contacts with the body and abides in those libera-
tions that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending forms, and
his taints are destroyed by his seeing with wisdom. This kind of
person is called one liberated-in-both-ways. 702 I do not Say of
such a bhikkhu that he still has work to do with diligence. Why
is that? He has done his work with diligence; he is no more
capable of being negligent.


i 479


At Kitagiri 581


16. "What kind of person is one liberated-by-wisdom? Here
some person does not contact with the body and abide in those
liberations that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending
forms, but his taints are destroyed by his seeing with wisdom.
This kind of person is called one liberated-by-wisdom. 703 [478] I
do not say of such a bhikkhu that he still has work to do with
diligence. Why is that? He has done his work with diligence; he
is no more capable of being negligent.

17. "What kind of person is a body-witness? Here some per-
son contacts with the body and abides in those liberations that
are peaceful and immaterial, transcending forms, and some of
his taints are destroyed by his seeing with wisdom. This kind
of person is called a body-witness. 704 I say of such a bhikkhu
that he still has work to do with diligence. Why is that?
Because when that venerable one makes use of suitable resting
places and associates with good friends and balances his spiritu-
al faculties, he may by realising for himself with direct knowl-
edge here and now enter upon and abide in that supreme goal
of the holy life for the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth
from the home life into homelessness. Seeing this fruit of dili-
gence for such a bhikkhu, I say that he still has work to do
with diligence.

18. "What kind of person is one attained-to-view? Here some
person does not contact with the body and abide in those libera-
tions that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending forms, but
some of his taints are destroyed by his seeing with wisdom, and
he has reviewed and examined with wisdom the teachings pro-
claimed by the Tathagata. This kind of person is called one
attained-to-view. 705 1 say of such a bhikkhu that he still has work
to do with diligence. Why is that? Because when that venerable
one... into homelessness. Seeing this fruit of diligence for such a
bhikkhu, I say that he still has work to do with diligence.

19. "What kind of person is one liberated-by-faith? Here some
person does not contact with the body and abide in those libera-
tions that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending forms, but
some of his taints are destroyed by his seeing with wisdom, and
his faith is planted, rooted, and established in the Tathagata. 706
This kind of person is called one liberated-by-faith. I say of such
a bhikkhu that he still has work to do with diligence. Why is
that? Because when that venerable one [479]... into homelessness.


582 Kitagiri Sutta: Sutta 70


i 480


Seeing this fruit of diligence for such a bhikkhu, I say that he
still has work to do with diligence.

20. "What kind of person is a Dhamma-follower? Here some
person does not contact with the body and abide in those libera-
tions that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending forms, and
his taints are not yet destroyed by his seeing with wisdom, but
with wisdom he has sufficiently gained a reflective acceptance
of those teachings proclaimed by the Tathagata. Furthermore, he
has these qualities: the faith faculty, the energy faculty, the
mindfulness faculty, the concentration faculty, and the wisdom
faculty. This kind of person is called a Dhamma-follower. 707 1 say
of such a bhikkhu that he still has work to do with diligence. Why
is that? Because when that venerable one... into homelessness.
Seeing this fruit of diligence for such a bhikkhu, I say that he still
has work to do with diligence.

21. "What kind of person is a faith-follower? Here some per-
son does not contact with the body and abide in those libera-
tions that are peaceful and immaterial, transcending forms, and
his taints are not yet destroyed by his seeing with wisdom, yet
he has sufficient faith in and love for the Tathagata. Further-
more, he has these qualities: the faith faculty, the energy faculty,
the mindfulness faculty, the concentration faculty, and the wis-
dom faculty. This kind of person is called a faith-follower. I say
of such a bhikkhu that he still has work to do with diligence.
Why is that? Because when that venerable one makes use of
suitable resting places and associates with good friends and bal-
ances his spiritual faculties, he may by realising for himself with
direct knowledge here and now enter upon and abide in that
supreme goal of the holy life for the sake of which clansmen
rightly go forth from the home life into homelessness. Seeing
this fruit of diligence for such a bhikkhu, I say that he still has
work to do with diligence.

22. "Bhikkhus, I do not say that final knowledge is achieved
all at once. On the contrary, final knowledge is achieved by
gradual training, by gradual practice, by gradual progress. [480]

23. "And how does there come to be gradual training, gradual
practice, gradual progress? Here one who has faith [in a teacher]
visits him; when he visits him, he pays respect to him; when he
pays respect to him, he gives ear; one who gives ear hears the
Dhamma; having heard the Dhamma, he memorises it; he


i 481


At Kitagiri 583


examines the meaning of the teachings he has memorised; when
he examines their meaning, he gains a reflective acceptance of
those teachings; when he has gained a reflective acceptance of
those teachings, zeal springs up in him; when zeal has sprung
up, he applies his will; having applied his will, he scrutinises;
having scrutinised, he strives; resolutely striving, he realises
with the body the ultimate truth and sees it by penetrating it
with wisdom. 708

24. "There has not been that faith, 709 bhikkhus, and there has
not been that visiting, and there has not been that paying of
respect, and there has not been that giving ear, and there has not
been that hearing of the Dhamma, and there has not been that
memorising of the Dhamma, and there has not been that exami-
nation of the meaning, and there has not been that reflective
acceptance of the teachings, and there has not been that zeal, and
there has not been that application of will, and there has not been
that scrutiny, and there has not been that striving. Bhikkhus, you
have lost your way; bhikkhus, you have been practising the
wrong way. How far you have strayed, misguided men, from
this Dhamma and Discipline!

25. "Bhikkhus, there is a four-phrased statement, and when it
is recited a wise man would quickly understand it. 710 I shall
recite it to you, bhikkhus. Try to understand it."

"Venerable sir, who are we that we should understand the
Dhamma?"

26. "Bhikkhus, even with a teacher who is concerned with
material things, an heir to material things, attached to material
things, such haggling [by his disciples] would not be proper: Tf
we get this, we will do it; if we don't get this, we won't do it'; so
what [should be said when the teacher is] the Tathagata, who is
utterly detached from material things?

27. "Bhikkhus, for a faithful disciple who is intent on fathom-
ing the Teacher's Dispensation, it is proper that he conduct him-
self thus: 'The Blessed One is the Teacher, I am a disciple; the
Blessed One knows, I do not know.' For a faithful disciple who
is intent on fathoming the Teacher's Dispensation, the Teacher's
Dispensation is nourishing and refreshing. For a faithful disciple
who is intent on fathoming the Teacher's Dispensation, [481] it
is proper that he conduct himself thus: 'Willingly, let only my
skin, sinews, and bones remain, and let the flesh and blood dry


584 Kitagiri Sutta: Sutta 70


i 481


up on my body, but my energy shall not be relaxed so long as I
have not attained what can be attained by manly strength,
manly energy, and manly persistence.' 711 For a faithful disciple
who is intent on fathoming the Teacher's Dispensation, one of
two fruits may be expected: either final knowledge here and
now or, if there is a trace of clinging left, non-return."

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


3

The Division on Wanderers

(. Paribbajakavagga )



71 Tevijjavacchagotta Sutta
To Vacchagotta on the
Threefold True Knowledge


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Vesall in the Great Wood in the Hall with the Peaked Roof.

2. Now on that occasion the wanderer Vacchagotta was staying
in the Wanderers' Park of the Single White-lotus Mango Tree. 712

3. Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One dressed, and
taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Vesall for alms. Then
the Blessed One thought: "It is still too early to wander for alms
in Vesall. Suppose I went to the wanderer Vacchagotta in the
Wanderers' Park of the Single White-lotus Mango Tree."

4. Then the Blessed One went to the wanderer Vacchagotta in

the Wanderers' Park of the Single White-lotus Mango Tree.fThe X
wanderer Vacchagotta saw the Blessed One coming in the dis-
tance and said to him: "Let the Blessed One come, venerable sir!
Welcome to the Blessed One! It is long since the Blessed One
found an opportunity to come here. Let the Blessed One be seat-
ed; this seat is ready." The Blessed One sat down on the seat
made ready, and the wanderer Vacchagotta [482] took a low
seat, sat down at one side, and said to the Blessed One:

5. "Venerable sir, I have heard this: 'The recluse Gotama
claims to be omniscient and all-seeing, to have complete knowl-
edge and vision thus: "Whether I am walking or standing or
sleeping or awake, knowledge and vision are continuously and
uninterruptedly present to me.'" 713 Venerable sir, do those who
speak thus say what has been said by the Blessed One, and not
misrepresent him with what is contrary to fact? Do they explain
in accordance with the Dhamma in such a way that nothing
which provides a ground for censure can be legitimately
deduced from their assertion?"

"Vaccha, those who say thus do not say what has been said


587


588 Tevijjavacchagotta Sutta: Sutta 71


i 483


by me, but misrepresent me with what is untrue and contrary
to fact." 714 ,/”

6. "Venerable sir, how should I answer that I may say what

has been said by the Blessed One and not misrepresent him
with what is contrary to fact? How may I explain in accordance
with the Dhamma in such a way that nothing which provides a
ground for censure can be legitimately deduced from my
assertion?" , \

"Vaccha, if you answer thus: 'The recluse Gotama has the
threefold true knowledge/ you will be saying what has been
said by me and will not misrepresent me with what is contrary
to fact. You will explain in accordance with the Dhamma in such
a way that nothing which provides a ground for censure can be
legitimately deduced from your assertion.j

7. "For in so far as I wish, I recollect my manifold past lives,
that is, one birth, two births... (as Sutta 51, §24 )... Thus with their
aspects and particulars I recollect my manifold past lives.

8. "And in so far as I wish, with the divine eye, which is puri-
fied and surpasses the human, I see beings passing away and
reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and
unfortunate, and I understand how beings pass on according to
their actions. ..(as Sutta 51, §25)...

9. "And by realising for myself with direct knowledge, I here

and now enter upon and abide in the deliverance of mind and
deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with, the destruction of
the taints. *

10. "If you answer thus: The recluse Gotama has the threefold
true knowledge/ [483] you will be saying what has been said by
me and will not misrepresent me with what is contrary to fact.
You will explain in accordance with the Dhamma in such a way
that nothing which provides a ground for censure can be legiti-
mately deduced from your assertion."

11. When this was said, the wanderer Vacchagotta asked the
Blessed One: "Master Gotama, is there any householder who,
without abandoning the fetter of householdership, on the disso-
lution of the body has made an end of suffering?" 715

"Vaccha, there is no householder who, without abandoning
the fetter of householdership, on the dissolution of the body has
made an end of suffering."


i 483


To Vacchagotta on the Threefold Knowledge 589


12. “Master Gotama, is there any householder who, without
abandoning the fetter of householdership, on the dissolution of
the body has gone to heaven?"

"Vaccha, there are not only one hundred or two or three or
four or five hundred, but far more householders who, without
abandoning the fetter of householdership, on the dissolution of
the body have gone to heaven."

13. "Master Gotama, is there any Ajlvaka who, on the dissolu-
tion of the body, has made an end of suffering?" 716

"Vaccha, there is no Ajlvaka who, on the dissolution of the
body, has made an end of suffering."

14. "Master Gotama, is there any Ajlvaka who, on the dissolu-
tion of the' body, has gone to heaven?"

"When I recollect the past ninety-one aeons, Vaccha, I do not
recall any Ajlvaka who, on the dissolution of the body, went to
heaven, with one exception, and he held the doctrine of the
moral efficacy of action, the doctrine of the moral efficacy of
deeds." 717

15. "That being so. Master Gotama, this fold of other sectari-
ans is empty even of [a chance of] going to heaven."

"That being so, Vaccha, this fold of other sectarians is empty
even of [a chance of] going to heaven."

That is what the Blessed One said. The wanderer Vacchagotta
was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


72 Aggivacchagotta Suita
To Vacchagotta on Fire


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.

2. Then the wanderer Vacchagotta went to the Blessed One
[484] and exchanged greetings with him. When this courteous
and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and
asked the Blessed One:

\ 3 . "How is it. Master Gotama, does Master Gotama hold the view:
'The world is eternal: only this is true, anything else is wrong'?"

"Vaccha, I do not hold the view: The world is eternal: only
this is true, anything else is wrong."'

4. "How then, does Master Gotama hold the view: 'The world
is not eternal: only this is true, anything else is wrong'?"

"Vaccha, I do not hold the view: 'The world is not eternal:
only this is true, anything else is wrong.'"

5. "How is it. Master Gotama, does Master Gotama hold the view:
'The world is finite: only this is true, anything else is wrong'?"

"Vaccha, I do not hold the view: 'The world is finite: only this
is true, anything else is wrong.'"

6. "How then, does Master Gotama hold the view: 'The world
is infinite: only this is true, anything else is wrong'?"

"Vaccha, I do not hold the view: 'The world is infinite: only
this is true, anything else is wrong.'"

7. "How is it. Master Gotama, does Master Gotama hold the
view: 'The soul and the body are the same: only this is true, any-
thing else is wrong'?" 718

"Vaccha, I do not hold the view: 'The soul and the body are
the same: only this is true, anything else is wrong.'"

8. "How then, does Master Gotama hold the view: 'The soul
is one thing and the body another: only this is true, anything
else is wrong'?"


590


i486


To Vacchagotta on Fire 591


"Vaccha, I do not hold the view. 'The soul is one thing and the
body another: only this is true, anything else is wrong.'"

9. "How is it, Master Gotama, does Master Gotama hold the
view: 'After death a Tathagata exists: only this is true, anything
else is wrong'?" 719

"Vaccha, I do not hold the view: 'After death a Tathagata
exists: only this is true, anything else is wrong.'"

10. "How then, does Master Gotama hold the view: 'After death
a Tathagata does not exist: only this is true, anything else is
wrong'?"

"Vaccha, I do not hold the view: 'After death a Tathagata does
not exist: only this is true, anything else is wrong.'"

11. "How is it, Master Gotama, does Master Gotama hold the
view: 'After death a Tathagata both exists and does not exist:
only this is true, anything else is wrong.'?" [485]

"Vaccha, I do not hold the view: 'After death a Tathagata both
exists and does not exist: only this is true, anything else is wrong.'"

12. "How then, does Master Gotama hold the view: 'After
death a Tathagata neither exists nor does not exist: only this is
true, anything else is wrong'?" \

"Vaccha, 1 do not hold the view: 'After death a Tathagata neither
exists nor does not exist: only this is true, anything else is wrong.'"

13. "How is it then. Master Gotama? When Master Gotama is
asked each of these ten questions, he replies: 'I do not hold that
view.' What danger does Master Gotama see that he does not
take up any of these speculative views?"

14. "Vaccha, the speculative view that the world is eternal is a
thicket of views, a wilderness of views, a contortion of views, a
vacillation of views, a fetter of views. It is beset by suffering, by
vexation, by despair, and by fever, and it does not lead to disen-
chantment, to dispassion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowl-
edge, to enlightenment, to Nibbana.

"The speculative view that the world is not eternal... that the
world is finite... that the world is infinite... that the soul and the
body are the same... that the soul is one thing and the body
another... that after death a Tathagata exists [486]... that after
death a Tathagata does not exist... that after death a Tathagata
both exists and does not exist... that after death a Tathagata nei-
ther exists nor does not exist is a thicket of views, a wilderness
of views, a contortion of views, a vacillation of views, a fetter of


592 Aggivacchagotta Sutta: Sutta 72

views. It is beset by suffering, by vexation, by despair, and by
fever, and it does not lead to disenchantment, to dispassion, to
cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to
Nibbana. Seeing this danger, I do not take up any of these spec-
ulative views."

15. "Then does Master Gotama hold any speculative view at
all?"

"Vaccha, 'speculative view' is something that the Tathagata
has put away. For the Tathagata, Vaccha, has seen 720 this: 'Such
is material form, such its origin, such its disappearance; such is
feeling, such its origin, such its disappearance; such is percep-
tion, such its origin, such its disappearance; such are formations,
such their origin, such their disappearance; such is conscious-
ness, such its origin, such its disappearance.' Therefore, I say,
with the destruction, fading away, cessation, giving up, and
relinquishing of all conceivings, all excogitations, all I-making,
mine-making, and the underlying tendency to conceit, the
Tathagata is liberated through not clinging."

16. "When a bhikkhu's mind is liberated thus. Master Gotama,
where does he reappear [after death]?"

"The term 'reappears' does not apply, Vaccha." 721

"Then he does not reappear. Master Gotama?"

"The term 'does not reappear' does not apply, Vaccha."

"Then he both reappears and does not reappear. Master
Gotama?"

"The term 'both reappears and does not reappear' does not
apply, Vaccha."

"Then he neither reappears nor does not reappear. Master
Gotama?"

"The term 'neither reappears nor does not reappear' does not
apply, Vaccha."

17. "When Master Gotama is asked these four questions, he
replies: 'The term "reappears" does not apply, Vaccha; the term
"does not reappear" does not apply, Vaccha; the term "both
reappears and does not reappear" does not apply, Vaccha; the
term "neither reappears nor [487] does not reappear" does not
apply, Vaccha.' Here I have fallen into bewilderment. Master
Gotama, here I have fallen into confusion, and the measure of
confidence I had gained through previous conversation with
Master Gotama has now disappeared."




i 487


i 488


To Vacchagotta on Fire 593


18. "It is enough to cause you bewilderment, Vaccha, enough
to cause you confusion. For this Dhamma, Vaccha, is profound,
hard to see and hard to understand, peaceful and sublime, unat-
tainable by mere reasoning, subtle, to be experienced by the
wise. It is hard for you to understand it when you hold another
view, accept another teaching, approve of another teaching, pur-
sue a different training, and follow a different teacher. So I shall
question you about this in return, Vaccha. Answer as you
choose.

19. "What do you think, Vaccha? Suppose a fire were burning
before you. Would you know. 'This fire is burning before me'?"

"I would. Master Gotama."

"If someone were to ask you, Vaccha: 'What does this fire
burning before you burn in dependence on?' - being asked thus,
what would you answer?"

"Being asked thus. Master Gotama, I would answer: 'This fire
burning before me burns in dependence on grass and sticks.'"

"If that fire before you were to be extinguished, would you
know: 'This fire before me has been extinguished'?"

"I would. Master Gotama."

"If someone were to ask you, Vaccha: 'When that fire before
you was extinguished, to which direction did it go: to the east,
the west, the north, or the south?' - being asked thus, what
would you answer?"

"That does not apply. Master Gotama. The fire burned in
dependence on its fuel of grass and sticks. When that is used up,
if it does not get any more fuel, being without fuel, it is reckoned
as extinguished."

20. "So too, Vaccha, the Tathagata has abandoned that materi-
al form by which one describing the Tathagata might describe
him; 722 he has cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump,
done away with it so that it is no longer subject to future arising.
The Tathagata is liberated from reckoning in terms of material
form, Vaccha, he is profound, immeasurable, unfathomable like
the ocean. The term 'reappears' does not apply, the term 'does
not reappear' does not apply, [488] the term 'both reappears and
does not reappear' does not apply, the term 'neither reappears
nor does not reappear' does not apply. 723 The Tathagata has
abandoned that feeling by which one describing the Tathagata
might describe him... has abandoned that perception by which



594 Aggivacchagotta Sutta: Sutta 72


1489


one describing the Tathagata might describe him... has aban-
doned those formations by which one describing the Tathagata
might describe him... has abandoned that consciousness by
which one describing the Tathagata might describe him; he has
cut it off at the root, made it like a palm stump, done away with
it so that it is no longer subject to future arising. The Tathagata
is liberated from reckoning in terms of consciousness, Vaccha;
he is profound, immeasurable, unfathomable like the ocean. The
term 'reappears' does not apply, the term 'does not reappear'
does not apply, the term 'both reappears and does not reappear'
does not apply, the term 'neither appears nor does not appear'
does not apply."

21. When this was said, the wanderer Vacchagotta said to the
Blessed One: "Master Gotama, suppose there were a great sala
tree not far from a village or town, and impermanence wore
away its branches and foliage, its bark and sapwood, so that on
a later occasion, being divested of branches and foliage, divested
of bark and sapwood, it became pure, consisting entirely of
heartwood; so too, this discourse of Master Gotama's is divested
of branches and foliage, divested of bark and sapwood, and is
pure, consisting entirely of heartwood.

22. "Magnificent, Master Gotama! Magnificent, Master
Gotama! Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many
ways, as though he were turning upright what had been over-
thrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one
who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark [489] for those
with eyesight to see forms. I go to Master Gotama for refuge and
to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus. From today let
Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone to
him for refuge for life."



73 Mahavacchagotta Sutta
The Greater Discourse to Vacchagotta


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Rajagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels' Sanctuary.

2. Then the wanderer Vacchagotta went to the Blessed One
and exchanged greetings with him. When this courteous and
amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and said to
the Blessed One:

3. "I have had conversations with Master Gotama for a long
time. It would be good if Master Gotama would teach me in
brief the wholesome and the unwholesome."

"I can teach you the wholesome and the unwholesome in brief,
Vaccha, and I can teach you the wholesome and the unwholesome
at length. Still I will teach you the wholesome and the unwhole-
some in brief. Listen and attend closely to what I shall say."

"Yes, sir," he replied. The Blessed One said this:

4. "Vaccha, greed is unwholesome, non-greed is wholesome;
hate is unwholesome, non-hate is wholesome; delusion is
unwholesome, non-delusion is wholesome. In this way three
things are unwholesome and the other three things are wholesome.

5. "Killing living beings is unwholesome, abstention from
killing living beings is wholesome; taking what is not given is
unwholesome, abstention from taking what is not given is
wholesome; misconduct in sensual pleasures is unwholesome,
abstention from misconduct in sensual pleasures is wholesome;
false speech is unwholesome, abstention from false speech is
wholesome; malicious speech [490] is unwholesome, abstention
from malicious speech is wholesome; harsh speech is unwhole-
some, abstention from harsh speech is wholesome; gossip is
unwholesome, abstention from gossip is wholesome; covetous-
ness is unwholesome, uncovetousness is wholesome; ill will is
unwholesome, non-ill will is wholesome; wrong view is


595





i|! : i ;





596 Mahavacchagotta Sutta: Sutta 73 i 491


unwholesome, right view is wholesome. In this way ten things
are unwholesome and the other ten things are wholesome.

6. "When a bhikkhu has abandoned craving, cut it off at the
root, made it like a palm stump, done away with it so that it is
no longer subject to future arising, then that bhikkhu is an ara-
hant with taints destroyed, one who has lived the holy life, done
what had to be done, laid down the burden, reached the true
goal, destroyed the fetters of being, and is completely liberated
through final knowledge."

7. "Apart from Master Gotama, is there any one bhikkhu.
Master Gotama's disciple, who by realising for himself with
direct knowledge here and now enters upon and abides in the
deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are taint-
less with the destruction of the taints?" 724

"There are not only one hundred, Vaccha, or two or three or
four or five hundred, but far more bhikkhus, my disciples, who
by realising for themselves with direct knowledge here and now
enter upon and abide in the deliverance of mind and deliverance
by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the taints."

8. "Apart from Master Gotama and the bhikkhus, is there any
one bhikkhunl, Master Gotama's disciple, who by realising for
herself with direct knowledge here and now enters upon and
abides in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom
that are taintless with the destruction of the taints?"

"There are not only one hundred... or five. hundred, but far
more bhikkhunls, my disciples, who by realising for themselves
with direct knowledge here and now enter upon and abide in
the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are
taintless with the destruction of the taints."

9. "Apart from Master Gotama and the bhikkhus and
bhikkhunls, is there any one man lay follower. Master Gotama's
disciple, clothed in white leading a life of celibacy who, with the
destruction of the five lower fetters, will reappear spontaneously
[in the Pure Abodes] and there attain final Nibbana without
ever returning from that world?" 725

"There are not only one hundred. . .or five hundred, but far more
men lay followers, my disciples, clothed in white leading lives of
celibacy who, with the destruction of the five lower fetters, [491]
will reappear spontaneously [in the Pure Abodes] and there
attain final Nibbana without ever returning from that world."


i 491


The Greater Discourse to Vacchagotta 59 7


10. "Apart from Master Gotama, the bhikkhus and
bhikkhunls, and the men lay followers clothed in white leading
lives of celibacy, is there any one man lay follower. Master
Gotama's disciple, clothed in white enjoying sensual pleasures,
who carries out his instruction, responds to his advice, has gone
beyond doubt, become free from perplexity, gained intrepidity,
and become independent of others in the Teacher's Dis-
pensation?" 726

"There are not only one hundred... or five hundred, but far
more men lay followers, my disciples, clothed in white enjoying
sensual pleasures, who carry out my instruction, respond to my
advice, have gone beyond doubt, become free from perplexity,
gained intrepidity, and become independent of others in the
Teacher's Dispensation."

11. "Apart from Master Gotama, the bhikkhus and
bhikkhunls, and the men lay followers clothed in white, both
those leading lives of celibacy and those enjoying sensual plea-
sures, is there any one woman lay follower. Master Gotama's
disciple, clothed in white leading a life of celibacy who, with the
destruction of the five lower fetters, will reappear spontaneously
[in the Pure Abodes] and there attain final Nibbana without
ever returning from that world?"

"There are not only one hundred... or five hundred, but far
more women lay followers, my disciples, clothed in white leading
lives of celibacy who, with the destruction of the five lower fet-
ters, will reappear spontaneously [in the Pure Abodes] and there
attain final Nibbana without ever returning from that world."

12. "Apart from Master Gotama, the bhikkhus and bhikkhunls,
and the men lay followers clothed in white, both those leading
lives of celibacy and those enjoying sensual pleasures, and the
women lay followers clothed in white leading lives of celibacy, is
there any one woman lay follower. Master Gotama's disciple,
clothed in white enjoying sensual pleasures, who carries out his
instruction, responds to his advice, has gone beyond doubt,
become free from perplexity, gained intrepidity, and become
independent of others in the Teacher's Dispensation?"

"There are not only one hundred... or five hundred, but far
more women lay followers, my disciples, clothed in white enjoy-
ing sensual pleasures, who carry out my instruction, respond to
my advice, have gone beyond doubt, become free of perplexity.



i 493


598 Mahavacchagotta Sutta: Sutta 73


gained intrepidity, and become independent of others in the
Teacher's Dispensation."

13. "Master Gotama, if only Master Gotama were accom-
plished in this Dhamma, but no bhikkhus were accomplished,
[492] then this holy life would be deficient in that respect; but
because Master Gotama and bhikkhus are accomplished in this
Dhamma, this holy life is thus complete in that respect. If only
Master Gotama and bhikkhus were accomplished in this
Dhamma, but no bhikkhunis were accomplished, then this holy
life would be deficient in that respect; but because Master
Gotama, bhikkhus, and bhikkhunis are accomplished in this
Dhamma, this holy life is thus complete in that respect. If only
Master Gotama, bhikkhus, and bhikkhunis were accomplished in
this Dhamma, but no men lay followers clothed in white leading
lives of celibacy were accomplished, then this holy life would be
deficient in that respect; but because Master Gotama, bhikkhus
and bhikkhunis, and men lay followers clothed in white leading
lives of celibacy are accomplished in this Dhamma, this holy life
is thus complete in that respect. If only Master Gotama, bhikkhus
and bhikkhunis, and men lay followers clothed in white leading
lives of celibacy were accomplished in this Dhamma, but no men
lay followers clothed in white enjoying sensual pleasures were
accomplished, then this holy life would be deficient in that
respect; but because Master Gotama, bhikkhus and bhikkhunis,
and men lay followers clothed in white, both those leading lives
of celibacy and those enjoying sensual pleasures, are accom-
plished in this Dhamma, this holy life is thus complete in that
respect. If only Master Gotama, bhikkhus and bhikkhunis, and
men lay followers clothed in white... were accomplished in this
Dhamma, but no women lay followers clothed in white [493]
leading lives of celibacy were accomplished, then this holy life
would be deficient in that respect; but because Master Gotama,
bhikkhus and bhikkhunis, men lay followers clothed in
white... and women lay followers clothed in white leading lives
of celibacy are accomplished in this Dhamma, this holy life is
thus complete in that respect. If only Master Gotama, bhikkhus
and bhikkhunis, men lay followers clothed in white... and
women lay followers clothed in white leading lives of celibacy
were accomplished in this Dhamma, but no women lay followers
clothed in white enjoying sensual pleasures were accomplished.


i 494


The Greater Discourse to Vacchagotta 599


then this holy life would be deficient in that respect; but because
Master Gotama, bhikkhus and bhikkhunis, men lay followers
clothed in white, both those leading lives of celibacy and those
enjoying sensual pleasures, and women lay followers clothed in
white, both those leading lives of celibacy and those enjoying
sensual pleasures, are accomplished in this Dhamma, this holy
life is thus complete in that respect.

14. "Just as the river Ganges inclines towards the sea, slopes
towards the sea, flows towards the sea, and merges with the sea,
so too Master Gotama's assembly with its homeless ones and its
householders inclines towards Nibbana, slopes towards
Nibbana, flows towards Nibbana, and merges with Nibbana.

15. "Magnificent, Master Gotama! Magnificent, Master
Gotama! Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many
ways, as though he were turning upright what had been over-
thrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one
who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with
eyesight to see forms. I go to Master Gotama for refuge and to
the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus. I would receive the
going forth under Master Gotama, I would receive the full
admission." [494]

16. "Vaccha, one who formerly belonged to another sect and
desires the going forth and the full admission in this Dhamma
and Discipline lives on probation for four months. At the end of
four months, if the bhikkhus are satisfied with him, they give
him the going forth and the full admission to the bhikkhus'
state. But I recognise individual differences in this matter."

"Venerable sir, if those who formerly belonged to another sect
and desire the going forth and the full admission in this
Dhamma and Discipline live on probation for four months, and.
if at the end of the four months the bhikkhus being satisfied
with them give them the going forth and the full admission to
the bhikkhus' state, then I will live on probation for four years.
At the end of the four years if the bhikkhus are satisfied with
me, let them give me the going forth and the full admission to
the bhikkhus' state."

17. Then the wanderer Vacchagotta received the going forth
under the Blessed One, and he received the full admission. Not
long after his full admission, a half-month after his full admis-
sion, the venerable Vacchagotta went to the Blessed One, and


600 Mahavacchagotta Sutta: Sutta 73


i 495


after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and told
the Blessed One: "Venerable sir, I have attained whatever can be
attained by the knowledge of a disciple in higher training, by
the true knowledge of a disciple in higher training. Let the
Blessed One teach me the Dhamma further." 727

18. "In that case, Vaccha, develop further two things: serenity
and insight. When these two things are developed further, they
will lead to the penetration of many elements.

19. "To the extent that you may wish: 'May I wield the various
kinds of supernormal power: having been one, may I become
many; having been many, may I become one; may I appear and
vanish; may I go unhindered through a wall, through an enclo-
sure, through a mountain, as though through space; may I dive
in and out of the earth as though it were water; may I walk on
water without sinking as though it were earth; seated cross-
legged, may I travel in space like a bird; with my hand may I
touch and stroke the moon and sun so powerful and mighty;
may I wield bodily mastery even as far as the Brahma-world' -
you will attain the ability to witness any aspect therein, there
being a suitable basis. 728

20. "To the extent that you may wish: 'May I, with the divine
ear element, [495] which is purified and surpasses the human,
hear both kinds of sounds, the divine and the human, those that
are far as well as near' - you will attain the ability to witness any
aspect therein, there being a suitable basis.

21. "To the extent that you may wish: 'May I understand the
minds of other beings, of other persons, having encompassed
them with my own mind. May I understand a mind affected by
lust as affected by lust and a mind unaffected by lust as unaf-
fected by lust; may I understand a mind affected by hate as
affected by hate and a mind unaffected by hate as unaffected
by hate; may I understand a mind affected by delusion as
affected by delusion and a mind unaffected by delusion as
unaffected by delusion; may I understand a contracted mind as
contracted and a distracted mind as distracted; may I under-
stand an exalted mind as exalted and an unexalted mind as
unexalted; may I understand a surpassed mind as surpassed
and an unsurpassed mind as unsurpassed; may I understand a
concentrated mind as concentrated and an unconcentrated
mind as unconcentrated; may I understand a liberated mind as


i 497


The Greater Discourse to Vacchagotta 601


liberated and an unliberated mind as unliberated' - you will
attain the ability to witness any aspect therein, there being a
suitable basis.

22. "To the extent that you may wish: 'May I recollect my
manifold past lives, that is, one birth, two births... (as Sutta 51,
§24 )... Thus with their aspects and particulars may I recollect my
manifold past lives' - you will attain the ability to witness any
aspect therein, there being a suitable basis. [496]

23. "To the extent that you may wish: 'May I, with the divine
eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, see beings
passing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and
ugly, fortunate and unfortunate... (as Sutta 51, §25 ). ..and may I
understand how beings pass on according to their actions' - you
will attain the ability to witness any aspect therein, there being a
suitable basis.

24. "To the extent that you may wish: 'May I, by realising for
myself with direct knowledge, here and now enter upon and
abide in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom
that are taintless with the destruction of the taints' - you will
attain the ability to witness any aspect therein, there being a
suitable basis."

25. Then the venerable Vacchagotta, having delighted and
rejoiced in the Blessed One's words, rose from his seat, and after
paying homage to the Blessed One, keeping him on his right, he
departed.

26. Before long, dwelling alone, withdrawn, diligent, ardent,
and resolute, the venerable Vacchagotta, by realising for himself
with direct knowledge, here and now entered upon and abided
in that supreme goal of the holy life for the sake of which clans-
men rightly go forth from the home life into homelessness. He
directly knew: "Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived,’
what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming to
any state of being." And the venerable Vacchagotta became one
of the arahants.

27. Now on that occasion a number of bhikkhus were going
to see the Blessed One. The venerable Vacchagotta saw them
coming in the distance. Seeing them, he went to them and asked
them: [497] "Where are the venerable ones going?"

"We are going to see the Blessed One, friend."

"In that case, may the venerable ones pay homage in my


L


602 Mahavacchagotta Sutta: Sutta 73


i 49 7


name with their heads at the Blessed One's feet, saying-.
'Venerable sir, the bhikkhu Vacchagotta pays homage with his
head at the Blessed One's feet.' Then say: 'The Blessed One has
been worshipped by me, the Sublime One has been worshipped
by me.'" 729

"Yes, friend," those bhikkhus replied. Then they went to the
Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, they sat down at
one side and told the Blessed One: "Venerable sir, the venerable
Vacchagotta pays homage with his head at the Blessed One's
feet, and he says: 'The Blessed One has been worshipped by me,
the Sublime One has been worshipped by me.'"

28. "Bhikkhus, having encompassed his mind with my own
mind, I already knew of the bhikkhu Vacchagotta: 'The bhikkhu
Vacchagotta has attained the threefold true knowledge and has
great supernormal power and might.' And deities also told me
this: 'The bhikkhu Vacchagotta has attained the threefold true
knowledge and has great supernormal power and might.'"

That is what the Blessed One said. Those bhikkhus were satis-
fied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


74 Dighanakha Sutta
To Dighanakha


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was living
at Rajagaha in the Boar's Cave on the mountain Vulture Peak.

2. Then the wanderer Dighanakha went to the Blessed One
and exchanged greetings with him. 730 When this courteous and
amiable talk was finished, he stood at one side and said to the
Blessed One: "Master Gotama, my doctrine and view is this:
'Nothing is acceptable to me.'" 731

"This view of yours, Aggivessana, 'Nothing is acceptable to
me' - is not at least that view acceptable to you?"

"If this view of mine were acceptable to me. Master Gotama, it
too would be the same, it too [498] would be the same." 732

3. "Well, Aggivessana, there are plenty in the world who say:
'It too would be the same, it too would be the same,' yet they do
not abandon that view and they take up still some other view.
Those are few in the world who say: 'It too would be the same,
it too would be the same,' and who abandon that view and do
not take up some other view. 733

4. "Aggivessana, there are some recluses and brahmins whose
doctrine and view is this: 'Everything is acceptable to me.' There
are some recluses and brahmins whose doctrine and view is
this: 'Nothing is acceptable to me.' And there are some recluses
and brahmins whose doctrine and view is this: 'Something is
acceptable to me, something is not acceptable to me.' 734 Among
these, the view of those recluses and brahmins who hold the
doctrine and view 'Everything is acceptable to me' is close to
lust, close to bondage, close to delighting, close to holding, close
to clinging. The view of those recluses and brahmins who hold
the doctrine and view 'Nothing is acceptable to me' is close to
non-lust, close to non-bondage, close to non-delighting, close to
non-holding, close to non-clinging."


603


604 Dighanakha Sutta: Sutta 74


i 499


5. When this was said, the wanderer Dighanakha remarked-
"Master Gotama commends my point of view. Master Gotama
recommends my point of view."

"Aggivessana, as to those recluses and brahmins who hold the
doctrine and view 'Something is acceptable to me, something is
not acceptable to me' - the view of theirs as to what is accept-
able is close to lust, close to bondage, close to delighting, close to
holding, close to clinging, while the view of theirs as to what is
not acceptable is close to non-lust, close to non-bondage, close to
non-delighting, close to non-holding, close to non-clinging.

6. "Now, Aggivessana, a wise man among those recluses and
brahmins who hold the doctrine and view 'Everything is accept-
able to me' considers thus: 735 'If I obstinately adhere to my view
"Everything is acceptable to me" and declare: "Only this is true,
anything else is wrong," then I may clash with the two others:
with a recluse or brahmin who holds the doctrine [499] and
view "Nothing is acceptable to me" and with a recluse or brah-
min who holds the doctrine and view "Something is acceptable
to me, something is not acceptable to me." I may clash with
these two, and when there is a clash, there are disputes; when
there are disputes, there are quarrels; when there are quarrels,
there is vexation.' Foreseeing for himself clashes, disputes, quar-
rels, and vexation, he abandons that view and does not take up
some other view. This is how there comes to be the abandoning
of these views; this is how there comes to be the relinquishing of
these views.

7. "A wise man among those recluses and brahmins who
hold the doctrine and view 'Nothing is acceptable to me' con-
siders thus: 'If I obstinately adhere to my view "Nothing is
acceptable to me" and declare: "Only this is true, anything
else is wrong," then I may clash with the two others: with a
recluse or brahmin who holds the doctrine and view
"Everything is acceptable to me" and with a recluse or brah-
min who holds the doctrine and view "Something is accept-
able to me, something is not acceptable to me." I may clash
with these two, and when there is a clash, there are disputes;
when there are disputes, there are quarrels; when there are
quarrels, there is vexation.' Foreseeing for himself clashes, dis-
putes, quarrels, and vexation, he abandons that view and does
not take up some other view. This is how there comes to be


i 500


To Dighanakha 605


the abandoning of these views; this is how there comes to be
the relinquishing of these views.

8. "A wise man among those recluses and brahmins who hold
the doctrine and view 'Something is acceptable to me, some-
thing is not acceptable to me' considers thus: 'If I obstinately
adhere to my view "Something is acceptable to me, something is
not acceptable to me" and declare: "Only this is true, anything
else is wrong," then I may clash with the two others: with a
recluse or brahmin who holds the doctrine and view "Every-
thing is acceptable to me" and with a recluse or brahmin who
holds the doctrine and view "Nothing is acceptable to me." I
may clash with these two, and when there is a clash, there are
disputes; when there are disputes, there are quarrels; when
there are quarrels, there is vexation.' Foreseeing for himself
clashes, disputes, quarrels, and vexation, he abandons that view
and does not take up some other view. This is how there comes
to be the abandoning of these views; this is how there comes to
be the relinquishing of these views. [500]

9. "Now, Aggivessana, 736 this body made of material form,
consisting of the four great elements, procreated by a mother and
father, and built up out of boiled rice and porridge, is subject to
impermanence, to being worn and rubbed away, to dissolution
and disintegration. It should be regarded as impermanent, as
suffering, as a disease, as a tumour, as a dart, as a calamity, as
an affliction, as alien, as disintegrating, as void, as not self.
When one regards this body thus, one abandons desire for the
body, affection for the body, subservience to the body.

10. "There are, Aggivessana, three kinds of feeling: pleasant
feeling, painful feeling, and neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling.
On the occasion when one feels pleasant feeling, one does not
feel painful feeling or neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling; on
that occasion one feels only pleasant feeling. On the occasion
when one feels painful feeling, one does not feel pleasant feeling
or neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling; on that occasion one feels
only painful feeling. On the occasion when one feels neither-
painful-nor-pleasant feeling, one does not feel pleasant feeling
or painful feeling; on that occasion one feels only neither-
painful-nor-pleasant feeling.

11. "Pleasant feeling, Aggivessana, is impermanent, condi-
tioned, dependently arisen, subject to destruction, vanishing.


606 Dighanakha Sutta: Sutta 74


i 501


fading away, and ceasing. Painful feeling too is impermanent,
conditioned, dependently arisen, subject to destruction, vanish-
ing, fading away, and ceasing. Neither-painful-nor -pleasant
feeling too is impermanent, conditioned, dependently arisen,
subject to destruction, vanishing, fading away, and ceasing.

12. "Seeing thus, a well-taught noble disciple becomes disen-
chanted with pleasant feeling, disenchanted with painful feeling,
disenchanted with neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling. Being
disenchanted, he becomes dispassionate. Through dispassion
[his mind] is liberated. When it is liberated there comes the
knowledge: 'It is liberated.' He understands: 'Birth is destroyed,
the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done,
there is no more coming to any state of being.'

13. "A bhikkhu whose mind is liberated thus, Aggivessana,
sides with none and disputes with none; he employs the speech
currently used in the world without adhering to it." 737

14. Now on that occasion the venerable Sariputta was stand-
ing behind the Blessed One, [501] fanning him. Then he thought:
"The Blessed One, indeed, speaks of the abandoning of these
things through direct knowledge; the Sublime One, indeed,
speaks of the relinquishing of these things through direct knowl-
edge." As the venerable Sariputta considered this, through not
clinging his mind was liberated from the taints. 738

15. But in the wanderer Dighanakha the spotless immaculate
vision of the Dhamma arose: "All that is subject to arising is sub-
ject to cessation." The wanderer Dighanakha saw the Dhamma,
attained the Dhamma, understood the Dhamma, fathomed the
Dhamma; he crossed beyond doubt, did away with perplexity,
gained intrepidity, and became independent of others in the
Teacher's Dispensation. 739

16. Then he said to the Blessed One: "Magnificent, Master
Gotama! Magnificent, Master Gotama! Master Gotama has made
the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning
upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden,
showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in
the dark for those with eyesight to see forms. I go to Master
Gotama for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of
bhikkhus. From today let Master Gotama remember me as a lay
follower who has gone to him for refuge for life."


75 Magandiya Sutta
To Magandiya


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing in the Kuru country at a town of the Kurus named
Kammasadhamma, on a spread of grass in the fire chamber of a
brahmin belonging to the Bharadvaja clan.

2. Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One dressed, and
taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Kammasadhamma for
alms. When he had wandered for alms in Kammasadhamma
and had returned from his almsround, after his meal he went to
a certain grove for the day's abiding. Having entered the grove,
he sat down at the root of a tree for the day's abiding. [502]

3. Then the wanderer Magandiya, while walking and wan-
dering for exercise, went to the fire chamber of the brahmin
belonging to the Bharadvaja clan. There he saw a spread of
grass prepared and asked the brahmin: "For whom has this
spread of grass been prepared in Master Bharadvaja's fire
chamber? It seems like a recluse's bed."

4. "Master Magandiya, there is the recluse Gotama, the son of
the Sakyans, who went forth from a Sakyan clan. Now a good
report of Master Gotama has been spread to this effect: 'That
Blessed One is accomplished, fully enlightened, perfect in true
knowledge and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incompa-
rable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and
humans, enlightened, blessed.' This bed has been prepared for
that Master Gotama."

5. "Indeed, Master Bharadvaja, it is an ill sight we see when
we see the bed of that destroyer of growth, 740 Master Gotama."

"Be careful what you say, Magandiya, be careful what you
say! Many learned nobles, learned brahmins, learned house-
holders, and learned recluses have full confidence in Master


607


608 Magandiya Sutta: Sutta 75 i 503


Gotama, and have been disciplined by him in the noble true
way, in the Dhamma that is wholesome."

"Master Bharadvaja, even if we saw that Master Gotama face
to face, we would tell him to his face: 'The recluse Gotama is a
destroyer of growth.' Why is that? Because that is recorded in
our scriptures."

"If Master Magandiya has no objection, may I tell this to
Master Gotama?"

"Let Master Bharadvaja be at ease. Tell him just what I have said."

6. Meanwhile, with the divine ear, which is purified and sur-
passes the human, the Blessed One heard this conversation
between the brahmin of the Bharadvaja clan and the wanderer
Magandiya. Then, when it was evening, the Blessed One rose
from meditation, went to the brahmin's fire chamber, and sat
down on the spread of grass made ready. Then the brahmin of
the Bharadvaja clan went to the Blessed One and exchanged
greetings with him. When this courteous and amiable talk was
finished, he sat down at one side. The Blessed One asked him:
"Bharadvaja, did you have any conversation with the wanderer
Magandiya [503] about this spread of grass?"

When this was said, the brahmin, awestruck and with his hair
standing on end, replied: "We wanted to tell Master Gotama
about that very thing, but Master Gotama has anticipated us."

7. But this discussion between the Blessed One and the brah-
min of the Bharadvaja clan was left unfinished, for then the
wanderer Magandiya, while walking and wandering for exer-
cise, came to the brahmin's fire chamber and went up to the
Blessed One. He exchanged greetings with the Blessed One, and
when this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down
at one side. The Blessed One said to him:

8. "Magandiya, the eye delights in forms, takes delight in
forms, rejoices in forms; that has been tamed by the Tathagata,
guarded, protected, and restrained, and he teaches the Dhamma
for its restraint. Was it with reference to this that you said: "The
recluse Gotama is a destroyer of growth'?"

"It was with reference to this. Master Gotama, that I said: 'The
recluse Gotama is a destroyer of growth.' Why is that? Because
that is recorded in our scriptures."

"The ear delights in sound. . .The nose delights in odours. . .The
tongue delights in flavours. ..The body delights in


i 504


To Magandiya 609


tangibles... The mind delights in mind-objects, takes delight in
mind-objects, rejoices in mind-objects; that has been tamed by
the Tathagata, guarded, protected, and restrained, and he teach-
es the Dhamma for its restraint. Was it with reference to this that
you said: 'The recluse Gotama is a destroyer of growth'?"

"It was with reference to this. Master Gotama, that I said: 'The
recluse Gotama is a destroyer of growth.' Why is that? Because
that is recorded in our scriptures."

9. "What do you think, Magandiya? Here someone [504] may
have formerly enjoyed himself with forms cognizable by the eye
that are wished for, desired, agreeable, and likeable, connected
with sensual desire and provocative of lust. On a later occasion,
having understood as they actually are the origin, the disap-
pearance, the gratification, the danger, and the escape in the
case of forms, he might abandon craving for forms, remove
fever for forms, and abide without thirst, with a mind inwardly
at peace. What would you say to him, Magandiya?" - "Nothing,
Master Gotama."

"What do you think, Magandiya? Here someone may have for-
merly enjoyed himself with sounds cognizable by the ear... with
odours cognizable by the nose. . .with flavours cognizable by the
tongue... with tangibles cognizable by the body that are wished
for, desired, agreeable, and likeable, connected with sensual desire
and provocative of lust. On a later occasion, having understood as
they actually are the origin, the disappearance, the gratification,
the danger, and the escape in the case of tangibles, he might aban-
don craving for tangibles, remove fever for tangibles, and abide
without thirst, with a mind inwardly at peace. What would you
say to him, Magandiya?" - "Nothing, Master Gotama."

10. "Magandiya, formerly when I lived the home life, I enjoyed .
myself, provided and endowed with the five cords of sensual
pleasure: with forms cognizable by the eye. . .with sounds cogniz-
able by the ear... with odours cognizable by the nose... with
flavours cognizable by the tongue. ..with tangibles cognizable by
the body that are wished for, desired, agreeable, and likeable,
connected with sensual desire and provocative of lust. I had
three palaces, one for the rainy season, one for the winter, and
one for the summer. I lived in the rains' palace for the four
months of the rainy season, enjoying myself with musicians who
were all female, and I did not go down to the lower palace. 741


i 505


610 Magandiya Sutta: Sutta 75


"On a later occasion, having understood as they actually are
the origin, the disappearance, the gratification, the danger, and
the escape in the case of sensual pleasures, I abandoned craving
for sensual pleasures, I removed fever for sensual pleasures, and
I abide without thirst, with a mind inwardly at peace. I see other
beings who are not free from lust for sensual pleasures being
devoured by craving for sensual pleasures, burning with fever
for sensual pleasures, indulging in sensual pleasures, and I do
not envy them, nor do I delight therein. Why is that? Because
there is, Magandiya, a delight apart from sensual pleasures,
apart from unwholesome states, [505] which surpasses divine
bliss. 742 Since I take delight in that, I do not envy what is infe-
rior, nor do I delight therein.

11. "Suppose, Magandiya, a householder or a householder's
son was rich, with great wealth and property, and being provided
and endowed with the five cords of sensual pleasure, he might
enjoy himself with forms cognizable by the eye... with sounds
cognizable by the ear. ..with odours cognizable by the
nose... with flavours cognizable by the tongue... with tangibles
cognizable by the body that are wished for, desired, agreeable,
and likeable, connected with sensual desire and provocative of
lust. Having conducted himself well in body, speech, and mind,
on the dissolution of the body, after death, he might reappear in
a happy destination, in the heavenly world in the retinue of the
gods of the Thirty- three; and there, surrounded by a group of
nymphs in the Nandana Grove, he would enjoy himself, provid-
ed and endowed with the five cords of divine sensual pleasure.
Suppose he saw a householder or a householder's son enjoying
himself, provided and endowed with the five cords of [human]
sensual pleasure. What do you think, Magandiya? Would that
young god surrounded by the group of nymphs in the Nandana
Grove, enjoying himself, provided and endowed with the five
cords of divine sensual pleasure, envy the householder or the
householder's son for the five cords of human sensual pleasure
or would he return to human sensual pleasures?"

"No, Master Gotama. Why not? Because heavenly sensual
pleasures are more excellent and sublime than human sensual
pleasures."

12. "So too, Magandiya, formerly when I lived the home life, I
enjoyed myself, provided and endowed with the five cords of


i 507


T o Magandiya 611


sensual pleasure: with forms cognizable by the eye... with tangi-
bles cognizable by the body that are wished for, desired, agree-
able, and likeable, connected with sensual desire and provocative
of lust. On a later occasion, having understood as they actually
are the gratification, the danger, and the escape in the case of
sensual pleasures, I abandoned craving for sensual pleasures, I
removed fever for sensual pleasures, and I abide without thirst,
with a mind inwardly at peace. I see other beings who are not
free from lust for sensual pleasures being devoured by craving
for sensual pleasures, burning with fever for sensual pleasures,
[506] indulging in sensual pleasures, and I do not envy them nor
do I delight therein. Why is that? Because there is, Magandiya, a
delight apart from sensual pleasures, apart from unwholesome
states, which surpasses divine bliss. Since I take delight in that, I
do not envy what is inferior, nor do I delight therein.

13. "Suppose, Magandiya, there was a leper with sores and
blisters on his limbs, being devoured by worms, scratching the
scabs off the openings of his wounds with his nails, cauterising
his body over a burning charcoal pit. Then his friends and com-
panions, his kinsmen and relatives, would bring a physician to
treat him. The physician would make medicine for him, and by
means of that medicine the man would be cured of his leprosy
and would become well and happy, independent, master of
himself, able to go where he likes. Then he might see another
leper with sores and blisters on his limbs, being devoured by
worms, scratching the scabs off the openings of his wounds with
his nails, cauterising his body over a burning charcoal pit. What
do you think, Magandiya? Would that man envy that leper for
his burning charcoal pit or his use of medicine?"

"No, Master Gotama. Why is that? Because when there is sick-
ness, medicine has to be made, and when there is no sickness
medicine does not have to be made."

14. "So too, Magandiya, formerly when I lived the home
life. ..(as in §12 ). ..Since I take delight in that, I do not envy what
is inferior, nor do I delight therein. [507]

15. "Suppose, Magandiya, there was a leper with sores and
blisters on his limbs, being devoured by worms, scratching the
scabs off the openings of his wounds with his nails, cauterising
his body over a burning charcoal pit. Then his friends and com-
panions, his kinsmen and relatives, brought a physician to treat


612 Magandiya Sutta: Sutta 75


i 508


him. The physician would make medicine for him, and by
means of that medicine the man would be cured of his leprosy
and would become well and happy, independent, master of
himself, able to go where he likes. Then two strong men would
seize him by both arms and drag him towards a burning char-
coal pit. What do you think, Magandiya? Would that man twist
his body this way and that?"

"Yes, Master Gotama. Why is that? Because that fire is indeed
painful to touch, hot, and scorching."

"What do you think, Magandiya? Is it only now that that fire
is painful to touch, hot, and scorching, or previously too was
that fire painful to touch, hot, and scorching?"

"Master Gotama, that fire is now painful to touch, hot, and
scorching, and previously too that fire was painful to touch, hot,
and scorching. For when that man was a leper with sores and
blisters on his limbs, being devoured by worms, scratching the
scabs off the openings of his wounds with his nails, his faculties
were impaired; thus, though the fire was actually painful to
touch, he mistakenly perceived it as pleasant."

16. "So too, Magandiya, in the past sensual pleasures were
painful to touch, hot, and scorching; in the future sensual plea-
sures will be painful to touch, hot, and scorching; and now at
present sensual pleasures are painful to touch, hot, and scorch-
ing. But these beings who are not free from lust for sensual
pleasures, who are devoured by craving for sensual pleasures,
who burn with fever for sensual pleasures, have faculties that
are impaired; thus, though sensual pleasures are actually
painful to touch, they acquire a mistaken perception of them as
pleasant. 743

17. "Suppose, Magandiya, there was a leper with sores and
blisters on his limbs, being devoured by worms, scratching the
scabs off the openings of his wounds with his nails, cauterising
his body over a burning charcoal pit; the more he scratches the
scabs and cauterises his body, [508] the fouler, more evil-
smelling and more infected the openings of his wounds would
become, yet he would find a certain measure of satisfaction and
enjoyment in scratching the openings of his wounds. So too,
Magandiya, beings who are not free from lust for sensual plea-
sures, who are devoured by craving for sensual pleasures, who
burn with fever for sensual pleasures, still indulge in sensual


i 509


To Magandiya 613


pleasures; the more such beings indulge in sensual pleasures, •
the more their craving for sensual pleasures increases and the
more they are burned by their fever for sensual pleasures, yet
they find a certain measure of satisfaction and enjoyment in
dependence on the five cords of sensual pleasure.

18. "What do you think, Magandiya? Have you ever seen or
heard of a king or a king's minister enjoying himself, provided
and endowed with the five cords of sensual pleasure who, with-
out abandoning craving for sensual pleasures, without remov-
ing fever for sensual pleasures, was able to abide free from
thirst, with a mind inwardly at peace, or who is able or who will
be able to so abide?" - "No, Master Gotama."

"Good, Magandiya. I too have never seen or heard of a king or
a king's minister enjoying himself, provided and endowed with
the five cords of sensual pleasure who, without abandoning
craving for sensual pleasures, without removing fever for sen-
sual pleasures, was able to abide free from thirst, with a mind
inwardly at peace, or who is able or who will be able to so abide.
On the contrary, Magandiya, those recluses or brahmins who
abided or abide or will abide free from thirst, with a mind
inwardly at peace, all do so after having understood as they
actually are the origin, the disappearance, the gratification, the
danger, and the escape in the case of sensual pleasures, and it is
after abandoning craving for sensual pleasures and removing
fever for sensual pleasures that they abided or abide or will
abide free from thirst, with a mind inwardly at peace."

19. Then at that point the Blessed One uttered this exclamation:

"The greatest of all gains is health,

Nibbana is the greatest bliss.

The eightfold path is the best of paths
For it leads safely to the Deathless."

When this was said, the wanderer Magandiya said to the
Blessed One: "It is wonderful. Master Gotama, it is marvellous
how well that has been expressed by Master Gotama: [509]

'The greatest of all gains is health,

Nibbana is the greatest bliss.'


614 Magandiya Sutta: Sutta 75


i 510


We too have heard this said by earlier wanderers in the tradition
of the teachers, and it agrees. Master Gotama."

"But, Magandiya, when you heard that said by earlier wan-
derers in the tradition of the teachers, what is that health, what
is that Nibbana?"

When this was said, the wanderer Magandiya rubbed his
limbs with his hands and said: "This is that health. Master
Gotama, this is that Nibbana; for I am now healthy and happy
and nothing afflicts me." 744

20. "Magandiya, suppose there was a man born blind who
could not see dark and light forms, who could not see blue, yel-
low, red, or pink forms, who could not see what was even and
uneven, who could not see the stars or the sun and moon. He
might hear a man with good eyesight saying: 'Good indeed, sirs,
is a white cloth, beautiful, spotless, and clean!' and he would go
in search of a white cloth. Then a man would cheat him with a
dirty soiled garment thus: 'Good man, here is a white cloth for
you, beautiful, spotless, and clean.' And he would accept it and
put it on, and being satisfied with it, he would utter words of
satisfaction thus: 'Good indeed, sirs, is a white cloth, beautiful,
spotless, and clean!' What do you think, Magandiya? When that
man born blind accepted that dirty soiled garment, put it on,
and being satisfied with it, uttered words of satisfaction thus:
'Good indeed, sirs, is a white cloth, beautiful, spotless, and
clean!' - did he do so knowing and seeing, or out of faith in the
man with good eyesight?"

"Venerable sir, he would have done so unknowing and unsee-
ing, [510] out of faith in the man with good eyesight."

21. "So too, Magandiya, the wanderers of other sects are blind
and visionless. They do not know health, they do not see
Nibbana, yet they utter this stanza thus:

'The greatest of all gains is health,

Nibbana is the greatest bliss.'

This stanza was uttered by the earlier Accomplished Ones,
Fully Enlightened Ones, thus:

'The greatest of all gains is health,

Nibbana is the greatest bliss,


i 511


To Magandiya 615


The eightfold path is the best of paths
For it leads safely to the Deathless.'

Now it has gradually become current among ordinary people. 745
And although this body, Magandiya, is a disease, a tumour, a
dart, a calamity, and an affliction, referring to this body you say:
'This is that health. Master Gotama, this is that Nibbana.' You
do not have that noble vision, Magandiya, by means of which
you might know health and see Nibbana."

22. "I have confidence in Master Gotama thus: 'Master
Gotama is capable of teaching me the Dhamma in such a way
that I can come to know health and to see Nibbana.'"

"Magandiya, suppose there was a man bom blind who could
not see dark and light forms... or the sun and moon. Then his
friends and companions, his kinsmen and relatives, would bring
a physician to treat him. The physician would make a medicine
for him, yet by means of that medicine the man's vision would
not arise or be purified. What do you think, Magandiya, would
that doctor reap weariness and disappointment?" - "Yes, Master
Gotama." - "So too, Magandiya, if I were to teach you the
Dhamma thus: 'This is that health, this is that Nibbana,' you
might not know health or see Nibbana, and that would be
wearisome and troublesome for me." [511]

23. "I have confidence in Master Gotama thus: 'Master
Gotama is capable of teaching me the Dhamma in such a way
that I can come to know health and to see Nibbana.'"

"Magandiya, suppose there was a man born blind who could
not see dark and light forms... or the sun and moon. He might
hear a man with good eyesight saying: 'Good indeed, sirs, is a
white cloth, beautiful, spotless, and clean!' and he would go in
search of a white cloth. Then a man would cheat him with a
dirty soiled garment thus: 'Good man, here is a white cloth for
you, beautiful, spotless, and clean.' And he would accept it and
put it on. Then his friends and companions, his kinsmen and rel-
atives, would bring a physician to treat him. The physician
would make medicine - emetics and purgatives, ointments and
counter-ointments and nasal treatment - and by means of that
medicine the man's vision would arise and be purified. Together
with the arising of his vision, his desire and liking for that dirty
soiled garment would be abandoned; then he might bum with


616 Magandiya Sutta: Sutta 75


i 512


indignation and enmity towards that man and might think that
he ought to be killed thus: 'Indeed, 1 have long been tricked,
cheated, and defrauded by this man with this dirty soiled gar-
ment when he told me: "Good man, here is a white cloth for
you, beautiful, spotless, and clean."'

24. "So too, Magandiya, if I were to teach you the Dhamma
thus: 'This is that health, this is that Nibbana,' you might know
health and see Nibbana. Together with the arising of your
vision, your desire and lust for the five aggregates affected by
clinging might be abandoned. Then perhaps you might think:
'Indeed, I have long been tricked, cheated, and defrauded by
this mind. For when clinging, I have been clinging just to mater-
ial form, I have been clinging just to feeling, I have been clinging
just to perception, I have been clinging just to formations, I have
been clinging just to consciousness. 746 With my clinging as con-
dition, being [comes to be]; with being as condition, birth; with
birth as condition, ageing and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain,
grief, [512] and despair come to be. Such is the origin of this
whole mass of suffering.'"

25. "I have confidence in Master Gotama thus: 'Master
Gotama is capable of teaching me the Dhamma in such a way
that I might rise up from this seat cured of my blindness.'"

"Then, Magandiya, associate with true men. When you associ-
ate with true men, you will hear the true Dhamma. When you
hear the true Dhamma, you will practise in accordance with the
true Dhamma. When you practise in accordance with the true
Dhamma, you will know and see for yourself thus: 'These are
diseases, tumours, and darts; but here these diseases, tumours,
and darts cease without remainder. 747 With the cessation of my
clinging comes cessation of being; with the cessation of being,
cessation of birth; with the cessation of birth, ageing and death,
sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair cease. Such is the
cessation of this whole mass of suffering.'"

26. When this was said, the wanderer Magandiya said:
"Magnificent, Master Gotama! Magnificent, Master Gotama!
Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many ways, as
though he were turning upright what had been overthrown,
revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was
lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with eyesight to
see forms. I go to Master Gotama for refuge and to the Dhamma


i 513


To Magandiya 617


and to the Sangha of bhikkhus. I would receive the going forth
under Master Gotama. I would receive the full admission."

27. "Magandiya, one who formerly belonged to another sect
and desires the going forth and the full admission in this Dham-
ma and Discipline lives on probation for four months. At the
end of four months, if the bhikkhus are satisfied with him, they
give him the going forth and the full admission to the bhikkhus'
state. But I recognise individual differences in this matter."

"Venerable sir, if those who formerly belonged to another sect
and desire the going forth and the full admission in this
Dhamma and Discipline live on probation for four months, and
if at the end of the four months the bhikkhus being satisfied
with them give them the going forth and the full admission to
the bhikkhus' state, then I will live on probation for four years.
At the end of the four years if the bhikkhus are satisfied with
me, let them give me the going forth and the full admission to
the bhikkhus' state." [513]

28. Then the wanderer Magandiya received the going forth
under the Blessed One, and he received the full admission. And
soon, not long after his full admission, dwelling alone, with-
drawn, diligent, ardent, and resolute, the venerable Magandiya,
by realising for himself with direct knowledge, here and now
entered upon and abided in that supreme goal of the holy life
for the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth from the home
life into homelessness. He directly knew: "Birth is destroyed, the
holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done,
there is no more coming to any state of being." And the vener-
able Magandiya became one of the arahants.


76 Sandaka Sutta
To Sandaka


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Kosambi in Ghosita's Park.

2. Now on that occasion the wanderer Sandaka was staying in
the Pilakkha-tree Cave with a large assembly of wanderers.

3. Then, when it was evening, the venerable Ananda rose from
meditation and addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Come, friends,
let us go to the Devakata Pool to see the cave." - "Yes, friend,"
those bhikkhus replied. Then the venerable Ananda went to the
Devakata Pool together with a number of bhikkhus.

4. Now on that occasion the wanderer Sandaka was seated
with a large assembly of wanderers who were making an
uproar, loudly and noisily talking many kinds of pointless
talk, 748 such as talk of kings, robbers, ministers, armies, dangers,
battles, food, drink, clothing, beds, garlands, perfumes, rela-
tives, vehicles, villages, towns, cities, countries, women, heroes,
streets, wells, the dead, 'trifles, the origin of the world, the ori-
gin of the sea, [514] whether things are so or are not so. Then
the wanderer Sandaka saw the venerable Ananda coming in the
distance. Seeing him, he quieted his own assembly thus: "Sirs,
be quiet; sirs, make no noise. Here comes the recluse Ananda, a
disciple of the recluse Gotama, one of the recluse Gotama's dis-
ciples staying in Kosambi. These venerable ones like quiet; they
are disciplined in quiet; they commend quiet. Perhaps if he finds
our assembly a quiet one, he will think to join us." Then the
wanderers became silent.

5. The venerable Ananda went to the wanderer Sandaka who
said to him: "Let Master Ananda come! Welcome to Master
Ananda! It is long since Master Ananda found an opportunity to
come here. Let Master Ananda be seated; this seat is ready."


618


1515


To Sandaka 619


The venerable Ananda sat down on the seat made ready, and
the wanderer Sandaka took a low seat and sat down at one side.
When he had done so, the venerable Ananda asked him: "For
what discussion are you sitting together here now, Sandaka?
And what was your discussion that was left unfinished?"

"Master Ananda, let be the discussion for which we are now
sitting together here. Master Ananda can well hear about it later.
It would be good if Master Ananda would give a talk on his
own teacher's Dhamma."

"Then, Sandaka, listen and attend closely to what I shall say."

"Yes, sir," he replied. The venerable Ananda said this:

6. "Sandaka, these four ways that negate the living of the holy
life have been declared by the Blessed One who knows and sees,
accomplished and fully enlightened, and also these four kinds of
holy life without consolation have been declared, wherein a
wise man certainly would not live the holy life, or if he should
live it, would not attain the true way, the Dhamma that is
wholesome." 749

"But, Master Ananda, what are those four ways that negate
the living of the holy life that have been declared by the Blessed
One who knows and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened,
wherein [515] a wise man certainly would not live the holy life,
or if he should live it, would not attain the true way, the
Dhamma that is wholesome?"

7. "Here, Sandaka, some teacher holds such a doctrine and
view as this: 'There is nothing given, nothing offered, nothing
sacrificed; no fruit or result of good and bad actions; no this
world, no other world; no mother, no father; no beings who are
reborn spontaneously; no good and virtuous recluses and brah-
mins in the world who have themselves realised by direct
knowledge and declare this world and the other world. A per-
son consists of the four great elements. 750 When he dies, earth
returns and goes back to the body of earth, water returns and
goes back to the body of water, fire returns and goes back to the
body of fire, air returns and goes back to the body of air; the fac-
ulties are transferred to space. [Four] men with the bier as fifth
carry away the corpse. The funeral orations last as far as the
charnel ground; the bones whiten; burnt offerings end with
ashes. Giving is a doctrine of fools. When anyone asserts the


620 Sandaka Sutta: Sutta 76


i 516


doctrine that there is [giving and the like], it is empty, false prat-
tle. Fools and the wise are alike cut off and annihilated with the
dissolution of the body; after death they do not exist.'

8. "About this a wise man considers thus: 'This good teacher
holds this doctrine and view: "There is nothing given... after
death they do not exist." If this good teacher's words are true,
then here [in this teaching] I have done [my duty] by not doing
[it], here I have lived [the holy life] by not living [it]. 751 Both of
us are exactly equal here [in this teaching], both have arrived at
equality, yet I do not say that both of us are cut off and annihi-
lated with the dissolution of the body, that after death we shall
not exist. But it is superfluous for this good teacher to go about
naked, to be shaven, to exert himself in the squatting posture,
and to pull out his hair and beard, since I, who live in a house
crowded with children, who use Benares sandalwood, who
wear garlands, scents, and unguents, and accept gold and silver,
shall reap exactly the same destination, the same future course,
as this good teacher. What do I know and see that I should lead
the holy life under this teacher?' So when he finds that this way
negates the living of the holy life, he turns away from it and
leaves it.

9. "This is the first way that negates the living of the holy life
that has been declared by the Blessed One who knows and sees,
accomplished and fully enlightened, wherein a wise man cer-
tainly would not live the holy life, [516] or if he should live it,
would not attain the true way, the Dhamma that is wholesome.

10. "Again, Sandaka, here some teacher holds such a doctrine
and view as this: 'When one acts or makes others act, when one
mutilates or makes others mutilate, when one tortures or makes
others inflict torture, when one inflicts sorrow or makes others
inflict sorrow, when one oppresses or makes others inflict
oppression, when one intimidates or makes others inflict intimi-
dation, when one kills living beings, takes what is not given,
breaks into houses, plunders wealth, commits burglary,
ambushes highways, seduces another's wife, utters falsehood -
no evil is done by the doer. If, with a razor-rimmed wheel, one
were to make the living beings on this earth into one mass of
flesh, into one heap of flesh, because of this there would be no
evil and no outcome of evil. If one were to go along the south
bank of the Ganges killing and slaughtering, mutilating and


i 517


To Sandaka 621


making others mutilate, torturing and making others inflict tor-
ture, because of this there would be no evil and no outcome of
evil. If one were to go along the north bank of the Ganges giv-
ing gifts and making others give gifts, making offerings and
making others make offerings, because of this there would be
no merit and no outcome of merit. By giving, by taming one-
self, by restraint, by speaking truth, there is no merit and no
outcome of merit.'

11. "About this a wise man considers thus: 'This good teacher
holds this doctrine and view: "When one acts... there is no merit
and no outcome of merit." If this good teacher's words are true,
then here [in this teaching] I have done [my duty] by not doing
[it], here I have lived [the holy life] by not living [it]. Both of us
are exactly equal here [in this teaching], both have arrived at
equality, yet I do not say that whatever both [of us] do, no evil is
done. But it is superfluous for this good teacher... What do I
know and see that I should lead the holy life under this teacher?'
So when he finds that this way negates the living of the holy life,
he turns away from it and leaves it.

12. "This is the second way that negates the living of the holy
life that has been declared by the Blessed One who knows and
sees, accomplished and fully enlightened . . .

13. "Again, Sandaka, here some teacher holds such a doctrine
and view as this: 'There is no cause or condition for the defile-
ment of beings; beings are defiled without cause or condition.
There is no cause or condition for the purification of beings;
beings are purified without cause or condition. There is no
power, no energy, no manly [517] strength, no manly endur-
ance. All beings, all living things, all creatures, all souls are
without mastery, power, and energy; moulded by destiny, cir-
cumstance, and nature, they experience pleasure and pain in the
six classes.'

14. "About this a wise man considers thus: 'This good teacher
holds this doctrine and view: "There is no cause... in the six
classes." If this good teacher's words are true, then here [in this
teaching] I have done [my duty] by not doing [it], here I have
lived [the holy life] by not living [it]. Both of us are exactly equal
here [in this teaching], both have arrived at equality, yet I do not
say that both [of us] will be purified without cause or condition.
But it is superfluous for this good teacher. . .What do I know and


622 Sandaka Sutta: Sutta 76


i 518


see that I should lead the holy life under this teacher?' So when
he finds that this way negates the living of the holy life, he turns
away from it and leaves it.

15. "This is the third way that negates the living of the holy
life that has been declared by the Blessed One who knows and
sees, accomplished and fully enlightened...

16. "Again, Sandaka, here some teacher holds such a doctrine
and view as this: 752 'There are these seven bodies that are
unmade, not brought forth, uncreated, without a creator, barren,
standing like mountain peaks, standing like pillars. They do not
move or change or obstruct each other. None is able [to arouse]
pleasure or pain or pleasure-and-pain in another. What are the
seven? They are the earth-body, the water-body, the fire-body,
the air-body, pleasure, pain, and the soul as the seventh. These
seven bodies are unmade... Herein, there is no killer, no slaugh-
terer, no hearer, no speaker, no cognizer, no intimater. Even
those who cut off someone's head with a sharp sword do not
deprive anyone of life; the sword merely passes through the
space between the seven bodies. There are these fourteen hun-
dred thousand principal kinds of generation, and sixty hundred
kinds, and six hundred kinds; there are five hundred kinds of
action, and five kinds of action, and three kinds of action, and
action and half-action; there are sixty-two ways, sixty-two sub-
aeons, six classes, eight planes of man, forty-nine hundred kinds
of livelihood, forty-nine kinds of wanderers, forty-nine hundred
[518] abodes of serpents, twenty hundred faculties, thirty hun-
dred hells, thirty-six elements of dust, seven percipient breeds,
seven non-percipient breeds, seven sheathless breeds, seven
kinds of gods, seven kinds of men, seven kinds of demons,
seven lakes, seven knots, seven kinds of chasms, seven hundred
kinds of chasms, seven kinds of dreams, seven hundred kinds of
dreams; and there are eighty-four hundred thousand great
aeons wherein, by running and wandering through the round of
rebirths, fools and the wise both will make an end of suffering.
There is none of this: "By this virtue or observance or asceticism
or holy life I shall make unripened action ripen or annihilate
ripened action as it comes." Pleasure and pain are meted out.
The round of rebirths is limited, there is no shortening or
extending it, no increasing or decreasing it. Just as a ball of
string when thrown goes as far as the string unwinds, so too, by


i 519


To Sandaka 623


running and wandering through the round of rebirths, fools and
the wise both will make an end of suffering/ 753

17. "About this a wise man considers thus: 'This good teacher
holds this doctrine and view: "There are these seven bodies...
fools and the wise both will make an end of suffering." If this
good teacher's words are true, then here [in this teaching] I have
done [my duty] by not doing [it], here I have lived [the holy life]
by not living [it]. Both of us are exactly equal here [in this teach-
ing], both have arrived at equality, yet I do not say that both of
us will make an end of suffering by running and wandering
through the round of rebirths. But it is superfluous for this good
teacher to go about naked, to be shaven, to exert himself in the
squatting position, and to pull out his hair and beard, since I,
who live in a house crowded with children, who use Benares
sandalwood, who wear garlands, scents, and unguents, and
accept gold and silver, shall reap exactly the same destination,
the same future course, as this good teacher. What do I know
and see that I should lead the holy life under this teacher?' So
when he finds that this way negates the living of the holy life, he
turns away from it and leaves it.

18. "This is the fourth way that negates the living of the holy
life that has been declared by the Blessed One who knows and
sees, accomplished and fully enlightened. . .

19. "These, Sandaka, are the four ways that negate the living
of the holy life that have been declared by the Blessed One who
knows and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened, [519]
wherein a wise man certainly would not live the holy life, or if
he should live it, would not attain the true way, the Dhamma
that is wholesome."

20. "It is wonderful. Master Ananda, it is marvellous, how the
four ways that negate the living of the holy life have been
declared by the Blessed One who knows and sees, accomplished
and fully enlightened... But, Master Ananda, what are those four
kinds of holy life without consolation that have been declared
by the Blessed One who knows and sees, accomplished and
fully enlightened, wherein a wise man certainly would not live
the holy life, or if he should live it, would not attain the true
way, the Dhamma that is wholesome?"

21. "Here, Sandaka, some teacher claims to be omniscient and
all-seeing, to have complete knowledge and vision thus:


624 Sandaka Sutta: Sutta 76


'Whether I am walking or standing or sleeping or awake,
knowledge and vision are continuously and uninterruptedly
present to me,' 754 He enters an empty house, he gets no alms-
food, a dog bites him, he meets with a wild elephant, a wild
horse, a wild bull, he asks the name and clan of a woman or a
man, he asks the name of a village or a town, and the way to go
there. When he is questioned: 'How is this?' he replies: 'I had to
enter an empty house, that is why I entered it. I had to get no
almsfood, that is why I did not get any. I had to be bitten by a
dog, that is why I was bitten. I had to meet with a wild elephant,
a wild horse, a wild bull, that is why I met with them. I had to
ask the name and clan of a woman or a man, that is why I asked.
I had to ask the name of a village or a town and the way to go
there, that is why I asked.'

22. "About this a wise man considers thus: 'This good teacher
claims to be omniscient and all-seeing, to have complete knowl-
edge and vision... When he is questioned: "How is this?" he
replies: "I had to. ..that is why I asked.'" So when he finds that
this holy life is without consolation, he turns away from it and
leaves it.

23. "This is the first kind of holy life without consolation that
has been declared by the Blessed One who knows and sees,
accomplished and fully enlightened, [520] wherein a wise man
certainly would not live the holy life, or if he should live it,
would not attain the true way, the Dhamma that is wholesome.

24. "Again, Sandaka, here some teacher is a traditionalist, one
who regards oral tradition as truth; he teaches a Dhamma by oral
tradition, by legends handed down, by what has come down in
scriptures. But when a teacher is a traditionalist, one who regards
oral tradition as truth, some is well remembered and some is
wrongly remembered, some is true and some is otherwise.

25. "About this a wise man considers thus: 'This good teacher
is a traditionalist... some is true and some is otherwise.' So when
he finds that this holy life is without consolation, he turns away
from it and leaves it.

26. "This is the second kind of holy life without consolation
that has been declared by the Blessed One who knows and sees,
accomplished and fully enlightened...

27. "Again, Sandaka, here a certain teacher is a reasoner, an
inquirer. He teaches a Dhamma hammered out by reasoning.


i 521


To Sandaka 625


following a line of inquiry as it occurs to him. But when a
teacher is a reasoner, an inquirer, some is well reasoned and
some is wrongly reasoned, some is true and some is otherwise.

28. "About this a wise man considers thus: 'This good teacher
is a reasoner... some is true and some is otherwise.' So when he
finds that this holy life is without consolation, he turns away
from it and leaves it.

29. "This is the third kind of holy life without consolation that
has been declared by the Blessed One who knows and sees,
accomplished and fully enlightened...

30. "Again, Sandaka, here a certain teacher is dull and con-
fused. Because he is dull and confused, [521] when he is asked
such and such a question, he engages in verbal wriggling, in eel-
wriggling: 'I don't say it is like this. And I don't say it is like
that. And I don't say it is otherwise. And I don't say it is not so.
And I don't say it is not not so.' 755

31. "About this a wise man considers thus: 'This good teacher
is dull and confused... [thus] he engages in verbal wriggling, in
eel- wriggling...' So when he finds that this holy life is without
consolation, he turns away from it and leaves it.

32. "This is the fourth kind of holy life without consolation
that has been declared by the Blessed One who knows and sees,
accomplished and fully enlightened. . .

33. "These, Sandaka, are the four kinds of holy life without con-
solation that have been declared by the Blessed One who knows
and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened, wherein a wise
man certainly would not live the holy life, or if he should live it,
would not attain the true way, the Dhamma that is wholesome."

34. "It is wonderful. Master Ananda, it is marvellous, how the
four kinds of holy life without consolation have been declared
by the Blessed One who knows and sees, accomplished and"
fully enlightened... But, Master Ananda, what does that teacher
assert, what does he declare, wherein a wise man certainly
would live the holy life, and while living it would attain the true
way, the Dhamma that is wholesome?"'

35-42. "Here, Sandaka, a Tathagata appears in the world,
accomplished, fully enlightened ... (as Sutta 51, §§12-19). ..he
purifies his mind from doubt.

43. "Having thus abandoned these five hindrances, imperfec-
tions of the mind that weaken wisdom, quite secluded from



626 Sandaka Sutta: Sutta 76


i 522


sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, he enters
upon and abides in the first jhana, which is accompanied by
applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born
of seclusion. A wise man certainly would live the holy life with
; a teacher under whom a disciple attains such a lofty distinction,

[522] and while living it he would attain the true way, the
Dhamma that is wholesome.

44-46. "Again, with the stilling of applied and sustained
thought, he enters upon and abides in the second jhana... With
the fading away as well of rapture... he enters upon and abides
in the third jhana. ..With the abandoning of pleasure and
pain... he enters upon and abides in the fourth jhana. A wise
man certainly would live the holy life with a teacher under
whom a disciple attains such a lofty distinction. . .

47. "When his concentrated mind is thus purified, bright,
unblemished, rid of imperfection, malleable, wieldy, steady, and
attained to imperturbability, he directs it to knowledge of the
recollection of past lives. He recollects his manifold past lives,
that is, one birth, two births. ..(as Sutta 51, §24 ). ..Thus with their
aspects and particulars he recollects his manifold past lives. A
wise man certainly would live the holy life with a teacher under
whom a disciple attains such a lofty distinction. . .
j 48. "When his concentrated mind is thus purified, bright,

I unblemished, rid of imperfection, malleable, wieldy, steady, and

attained to imperturbability, he directs it to knowledge of the
I passing away and reappearance of beings... (as Sutta 51,

■ §25). . .Thus with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses

|j the human, he sees beings passing away and reappearing, infe-

| rior and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and

| he understands how beings pass on according to their actions. A

wise man certainly would live the holy life with a teacher under
whom a disciple attains such a lofty distinction. . .

49. "When his concentrated mind is thus purified, bright,
unblemished, rid of imperfection, malleable, wieldy, steady, and
attained to imperturbability, he directs it to knowledge of the
destruction of the taints. He understands as it actually is: 'This is
suffering'... (as Sutta 51, §26 ). ..He understands as it actually is:
'This is the way leading to the cessation of the taints.'

| 50. "When he knows and sees thus, his mind is liberated from

the taint of sensual desire, from the taint of being, and from the


i 523


To Sandaka 627


taint of ignorance. When it is liberated there comes the knowl-
edge: 'It is liberated.' He understands: 'Birth is destroyed, the
holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done,
there is no more coming to any state of being.' A wise man cer-
tainly would live the holy life with a teacher under whom a dis-
ciple attains such a lofty distinction, and while living it he
would attain the true way, the Dhamma that is wholesome."

51. "But, Master Ananda, when a bhikkhu is an arahant with
taints destroyed, one who has lived the holy life, done what had
to be done, laid down the burden, reached the true goal,
destroyed the fetters of being, and is completely liberated through
final knowledge, [523] could he enjoy sensual pleasures?"

"Sandaka, when a bhikkhu is an arahant with taints destroyed
...and is completely liberated through final knowledge, he is
incapable of transgression in five cases. A bhikkhu whose
taints are destroyed is incapable of deliberately depriving a liv-
ing being of life; he is incapable of taking what is not given,
that is, of stealing; he is incapable of indulging in sexual inter-
course; he is incapable of knowingly speaking falsehood; he is
incapable of enjoying sensual pleasures by storing them up as
he did formerly in lay life. 756 When a bhikkhu is an arahant
with taints destroyed... he is incapable of transgression in these
five cases." 757

52. "But, Master Ananda, when a bhikkhu is an arahant with
taints destroyed... is his knowledge and vision that his taints are
destroyed continuously and uninterruptedly present to him
whether he is walking or standing or sleeping or awake?"

"As to that, Sandaka, I shall give you a simile, for some wise
men here understand the meaning of a statement by means of a
simile. Suppose a man's hands and feet were cut off. Would he
know 'My hands and feet are cut off' continuously and uninter-
ruptedly, whether he is walking or standing or sleeping or
awake, or would he know 'My hands and feet are cut off' only
when he reviews this fact?"

"The man. Master Ananda, would not know 'My hands and
feet are cut off' continuously and uninterruptedly; rather, he
would know 'My hands and feet are cut off' only when he
reviews this fact."

"So too, Sandaka, when a bhikkhu is an arahant with taints
destroyed. ..his knowledge and vision that his taints are


628 Sandaka Sutta: Sutta 76


i 524


destroyed is not continuously and uninterruptedly present to
him whether he is walking or standing or sleeping or awake;
rather, he knows 'My taints are destroyed' only when he
reviews this fact." 758

53. "How many emancipated ones 759 are there in this
Dhamma and Discipline, Master Ananda?"

"There are not only one hundred, Sandaka, or two hundred,
three hundred, four hundred or five hundred, but far more
emancipated ones than that in this Dhamma and Discipline."

"It is wonderful. Master Ananda, it is marvellous! There is no
lauding of one's own Dhamma and no disparaging of the
Dhamma of others; there is the teaching of the Dhamma in its
full range, [524] and so many emancipated ones appear. But
these Ajivakas, those mothers' dead sons, laud themselves and
disparage others, and they recognise only three emancipated
ones, namely, Nanda Vaccha, Kisa Sankicca, and Makkhali
Gosala." 760

54. Then the wanderer Sandaka addressed his own assembly:
"Go, sirs. The holy life is to be lived under the recluse Gotama. It
is not easy for us now to give up gain, honour, and renown."

That is how the wanderer Sandaka exhorted his own assembly
to live the holy life under the Blessed One.


77 Mahasakuludayi Sutta
The Greater Discourse
to Sakuludayin


[1] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was
living at Rajagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels' Sanctuary.

2. Now on that occasion a number of well-known wanderers
were staying at the Peacocks' Sanctuary, the wanderers' park -
that is, Annabhara, Varadhara, and the wanderer Sakuludayin,
as well as other well-known wanderers.

3. Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One dressed, and
taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Rajagaha for alms.
Then he thought: "It is still too early to wander for alms in
Rajagaha. Suppose I went to the wanderer Sakuludayin in the
Peacocks' Sanctuary, the wanderers' park."

4. Then the Blessed One when to the Peacocks' Sanctuary, the
wanderers' park. Now on that occasion the wanderer Sakulu-
dayin was seated with a large assembly of wanderers who were
making an uproar, loudly and noisily talking many kinds of
pointless talk, such as talk of kings... (as Sutta 76, §4) [2]...
whether things are so or are not so. Then the wanderer
Sakuludayin saw the Blessed One coming in the distance. Seeing
him, he quieted his own assembly thus: "Sirs, be quiet; sirs,
make no noise. Here comes the recluse Gotama. This venerable
one likes quiet and commends quiet. Perhaps if he finds our
assembly a quiet one, he will think to join us." Then the wan-
derers became silent.

5. The Blessed One went to the wanderer Sakuludayin, who
said to him: "Let the Blessed One come, venerable sir! Welcome
to the Blessed One! It is long since the Blessed One found an
opportunity to come here. Let the Blessed One be seated; this
seat is ready."

The Blessed One sat down on the seat made ready, and the
wanderer Sakuludayin took a low seat and sat down at one side.


629


630 Mahasakuludayi Sutta: Sutta 77


ii 3


When he had done so, the Blessed One asked him: "For what
discussion are you sitting together here now, Udayin? And what
was your discussion that was interrupted?"

6. "Venerable sir, let be the discussion for which we are now
sitting together here. The Blessed One can well hear about it
later. In recent days, venerable sir, when recluses and brahmins
of various sects have been gathering together and sitting together
in the debating hall, this topic has arisen: 'It is a gain for the peo-
ple of Anga and Magadha, it is a great gain for the people of
Anga and Magadha that these recluses and brahmins, heads of
orders, heads of groups, teachers of groups, well-known and
famous founders of sects regarded by many as saints, have come
to spend the Rains at Rajagaha. There is this Purana Kassapa,
the head of an order, the head of a group, the teacher of a group,
the well-known and famous founder of a sect regarded by many
as a saint: he has come to spend the Rains at Rajagaha. There is
also this Makkhali Gosala...this Ajita Kesakambalin...this
Pakudha Kaccayana...this Sanjaya Belatthiputta...this Nigantha
Nataputta, the head of an order, the head of a group, the teacher
of a group, [3] the well-known and famous founder of a sect
regarded by many as a saint: he too has come to spend the Rains
at Rajagaha. There is also this recluse Gotama, the head of an
order, the head of a group, the teacher of a group, the well-
known and famous founder of a sect regarded by many as a
saint: he too has come to spend the Rains at Rajagaha. Now
among these worthy recluses and brahmins, heads of
orders... regarded by many as saints, who is honoured, respected,
revered, and venerated by his disciples? And how, honouring
and respecting him, do they live in dependence on him?'

"Thereupon some said this: 'This Purana Kassapa is the head
of an order... regarded by many as a saint, yet he is not hon-
oured, respected, revered, and venerated by his disciples, nor do
his disciples live in dependence on him, honouring and respect-
ing him. Once Purana Kassapa was teaching his Dhamma to an
assembly of several hundred followers. Then a certain disciple
of his made a noise thus: "Sirs, do not ask Purana Kassapa this
question. He does not know that. We know that. Ask us that
question. We will answer that for you, sirs." It happened that
Purana Kassapa did not get his way, though he waved his arms


The Greater Discourse to Sakuludnyin 631


ii 5


and wailed: “Be quiet, sirs, make no noise, sirs. They are not
asking you, sirs. They are asking us. We will answer them."
Indeed, many of his disciples left him after refuting his doctrine
thus: "You do not understand this Dhamma and Discipline. I
understand this Dhamma and Discipline. How could you
understand this Dhamma and Discipline? Your way is wrong.
My way is right. I am consistent. You are inconsistent. What
should have been said first, you said last. What should have
been said last, you said first. What you had so carefully thought
up has been turned inside out. Your doctrine is refuted. You are
proved wrong. Go and learn better, or disentangle yourself if
you can!" Thus Purana Kassapa is not honoured, respected,
revered, and venerated by his disciples, nor do his disciples live
in dependence on him, honouring and respecting him. Indeed,
he is scorned by the scorn shown to his Dhamma.' [4]

"And some said this: 'This Makkhali Gosala...this Ajita
Kesakambalin...this Pakudha Kaccayana...this Sanjaya Belatthi-
putta...this Nigantha Nataputta is the head of an order... [but
he] is not honoured, respected, revered, and venerated by his
disciples, nor do his disciples live in dependence on him, hon-
ouring and respecting him. Indeed, he is scorned by the scorn
shown to his Dhamma.'

"And some said this: 'This recluse Gotama is the head of an
order, the head of a group, the teacher of a group, the well-
known and famous founder of a sect regarded by many as a
saint. He is honoured, respected, revered, and venerated by his
disciples, and his disciples live in dependence on him, honour-
ing and respecting him. Once the recluse Gotama was teaching
his Dhamma to an assembly of several hundred followers and
there a certain disciple of his cleared his throat. Thereupon one of
his companions in the holy life nudged him with his knee [to
indicate]: [5] "Be quiet, venerable sir, make no noise; the Blessed
One, the Teacher, is teaching us the Dhamma." When the recluse
Gotama is teaching the Dhamma to an assembly of several hun-
dred followers, on that occasion there is no sound of his disciples'
coughing or clearing their throats. For then that large assembly is
poised in expectancy: "Let us hear the Dhamma the Blessed One
is about to teach." Just as though a man were at a crossroads
pressing out pure honey and a large group of people were poised


632 Mahasakuludayi Sutta: Sutta 77


ii 6


in expectancy, so too, when the recluse Gotama is teaching the
Dhamma to an assembly of several hundred followers, on that
occasion there is no sound of his disciples' coughing or clear-
ing their throats. For then that large assembly is poised in
expectancy: "Let us hear the Dhamma the Blessed One is about
to teach." And even those disciples of his who fall out with their
companions in the holy life and abandon the training to return
to the low life - even they praise the Master and the Dhamma
and the Sangha; they blame themselves instead of others, say-
ing: "We were unlucky, we have little merit; for though we went
forth into homelessness in such a well-proclaimed Dhamma, we
were unable to live the perfect and pure holy life for the rest of
our lives." Having become monastery attendants or lay follow-
ers, they undertake and observe the five precepts. Thus the
recluse Gotama is honoured, respected, revered, and venerated
by his disciples, and his disciples live in dependence on him,
honouring and respecting him.'"

7. "But, Udayin, how many qualities do you see in me because
of which my disciples honour, respect, revere, and venerate me,
and live in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me?"

8. "Venerable sir, I see five qualities in the Blessed One
because of which his disciples honour, respect, revere, and ven-
erate him, and live in dependence on him, honouring and
respecting him. What are the five? First, venerable sir, the
Blessed One eats little and commends eating little; this I see as
the first quality of the Blessed One because of which his disci-
ples honour, respect, revere, and venerate him, and live in
dependence on him, honouring and respecting him. [6] Again,
venerable sir, the Blessed One is content with any kind of robe
and commends contentment with any kind of robe; this I see as
the second quality of the Blessed One... Again, venerable sir, the
Blessed One is content with any kind of almsfood and com-
mends contentment with any kind of almsfood; this I see as the
third quality of the Blessed One... Again, venerable sir, the
Blessed One is content with any kind of resting place and com-
mends contentment with any kind of resting place; this I see as
the fourth quality of the Blessed One... Again, venerable sir, the
Blessed One is secluded and commends seclusion; this I see as
the fifth quality of the Blessed One... Venerable sir, these are the
five qualities I see in the Blessed One because of which his


ii 8


The Greater Discourse to Sakuludayin 633


disciples honour, respect, revere, and venerate him, and live in
dependence on him, honouring and respecting him."

9. "Suppose, Udayin, my disciples honoured, respected,
revered, and venerated me, and lived in dependence on me,
honouring and respecting me, with the thought: 'The recluse
Gotama eats little and commends eating little.' Now there are
disciples of mine who live on a cupful or half a cupful of food, a
bilva fruit's or half a bilva fruit's quantity of food, [7] while I
sometimes eat the full contents of my almsbowl or even more.
So if my disciples honoured me... with the thought: 'The recluse
Gotama eats little and commends eating little,' then those disci-
ples of mine who live on a cupful of food... should not honour,
respect, revere, and venerate me for this quality, nor should they
live in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me.

"Suppose, Udayin, my disciples honoured, respected, revered,
and venerated me, and lived in dependence on me, honouring
and respecting me, with the thought: 'The recluse Gotama is
content with any kind of robe and commends contentment with
any kind of robe.' Now there are disciples of mine who are
refuse-rag wearers, wearers of coarse robes; they collect rags
from the charnel ground, rubbish heaps, or shops, make them
into patched robes, and wear them. But I sometimes wear robes
given by householders, robes so fine that pumpkin hair is coarse
in comparison. So if my disciples honoured me. ..with the
thought: 'The recluse Gotama is content with any kind of robe
and commends contentment with any kind of robe,' then those
disciples of mine who are refuse-rag wearers, wearers of coarse
robes... should not honour, respect, revere, and venerate me for
this quality, nor should they live in dependence on me, honour-
ing and respecting me.

"Suppose, Udayin, my disciples honoured, respected, revered,
and venerated me, and lived in dependence on me, honouring
and respecting me, with the thought: 'The recluse Gotama is
content with any kind of almsfood and commends contentment
with any kind of almsfood.' Now there are disciples of mine
who are almsfood eaters, who go on unbroken almsround from
house to house, who delight in gathering their food; when they
have entered among the houses they will not consent even when
invited to sit down. But I sometimes eat on invitation meals of
choice rice [8] and many sauces and curries. So if my disciples


634 Mahasakuludayi Sutta: Sutta 77


ii 9


honoured me. . .with the thought: < The recluse Gotama is content
with any kind of almsfood and commends contentment with
any kind of almsfood/ then those disciples of mine who are
almsfood eaters... should not honour, respect, revere, and vener-
ate me for this quality, nor should they live in dependence on
me, honouring and respecting me.

"Suppose, Udayin, my disciples honoured, respected, revered,
and venerated me, and lived in dependence on me, honouring
and respecting me, with the thought: 'The recluse Gotama is
content with any kind of resting place and commends content-
ment with any kind of resting place.' Now there are disciples of
mine who are tree-root dwellers and open-air dwellers, who do
not use a roof for eight months [of the year], while I sometimes
live in gabled mansions plastered within and without, protected
against the wind, secured by door bolts, with shuttered win-
dows. So if my disciples honoured me... with the thought: 'The
recluse Gotama is content with any kind of resting place and
commends contentment with any kind of resting place,' then
those disciples of mine who are tree-root dwellers and open-air
dwellers... should not honour, respect, revere, and venerate me
for this quality, nor should they live in dependence on me, hon-
ouring and respecting me.

"Suppose, Udayin, my disciples honoured, respected, revered,
and venerated me, and lived in dependence on me, honouring
and respecting me, with the thought: 'The recluse Gotama is
secluded and commends seclusion.' Now there are disciples of
mine who are forest dwellers, dwellers in remote resting places,
who live withdrawn in remote jungle-thicket resting places and
return to the midst of the Sangha once each half-month for the
recitation of the Patimokkha. But I sometimes live surrounded
by bhikkhus and bhikkhurus, by men and women lay followers,
by kings and kings' ministers, by other sectarians and their dis-
ciples. So if my disciples honoured me... with the thought: 'The
recluse Gotama is secluded and commends seclusion,' [9] then
those disciples of mine who are forest dwellers... should not
honour, respect, revere, and venerate me for this quality, nor
should they live in dependence on me, honouring and respect-
ing me. Thus, Udayin, it is not because of these five qualities
that my disciples honour, respect, revere, and venerate me, and
live in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me.


ii 10


The Greater Discourse to Sakuludayin 635


10. "However, Udayin, there are five other qualities because
of which my disciples honour, respect, revere, and venerate me,
and live in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me.
What are the five?

(i. THE HIGHER VIRTUE)

11. "Here, Udayin, my disciples esteem me for the higher virtue
thus: 'The recluse Gotama is virtuous, he possesses the supreme
aggregate of virtue/ This is the first quality because of which
my disciples honour, respect, revere, and venerate me, and live
in dependence on me, honouring and respecting me.

(II. KNOWLEDGE AND VISION)

12. "Again, Udayin, my disciples esteem me for my excellent
knowledge and vision thus: 'When the recluse Gotama says "I
know," he truly knows; when he says "I see," he truly sees. The
recluse Gotama teaches the Dhamma through direct knowl-
edge, not without direct knowledge; he teaches the Dhamma
with a sound basis, not without a sound basis; he teaches the
Dhamma in a convincing manner, not in an unconvincing man-
ner.' This is the second quality because of which [10] my disci-
ples honour me. . .

(m. THE HIGHER WISDOM)

13. "Again, Udayin, my disciples esteem me for the higher wis-
dom thus: 'The recluse Gotama is wise; he possesses the
supreme aggregate of wisdom. It is impossible that he should
not foresee the future courses of doctrine 761 or that he should
not be able to confute with reasons the current doctrines of oth-
ers.' What do you think, Udayin? Would my disciples, knowing
and seeing thus, break in and interrupt me?" - "No, venerable
sir." - "I do not expect instruction from my disciples; invariably,
it is my disciples who expect instruction from me. This is the
third quality because of which my disciples honour me. . .


636 Mahasakuludayi Sutta: Sutta 77


ii 11


(IV. THE FOUR NOBLE TRUTHS)

14. "Again, Udayin, when my disciples have met with suffering
and become victims of suffering, prey to suffering, they come to
me and ask me about the noble truth of suffering. Being asked, I
explain to them the noble truth of suffering, and I satisfy their
minds with my explanation. They ask me about the noble truth
of the origin of suffering. . .about the noble truth of the cessation
of suffering... about the noble truth of the way leading to the
cessation of suffering. Being asked, I explain to them the noble
truth of the way leading to the cessation of suffering, and I satis-
fy their minds with my explanation. This is the fourth quality
[11] because of which my disciples honour me. . .

(V. THE WAY TO DEVELOP WHOLESOME STATES)

( 1 . The Four Foundations of Mindfulness)

15. "Again, Udayin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way
to develop the four foundations of mindfulness. 762 Here a
bhikkhu abides contemplating the body as a body, ardent, fully
aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief
for the world. He abides contemplating feelings as feelings... He
abides contemplating mind as mind... He abides contemplating
mind-objects as mind-objects, ardent, fully aware, and mindful,
having put away covetousness and grief for the world. And
thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the con-
summation and perfection of direct knowledge. 763


(2. The Four Right Kinds of Striving)

16. "Again, Udayin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way
to develop the four right kinds of striving. Here a bhikkhu
awakens zeal for the non-arising of unarisen evil unwholesome
states, and he makes effort, arouses energy, exerts his mind, and
strives. He awakens zeal for the abandoning of arisen evil
unwholesome states. ..He awakens zeal for the arising of
unarisen wholesome states... He awakens zeal for the continu-
ance, non-disappearance, strengthening, increase, and fulfilment
by development of arisen wholesome states, and he makes


r


ii 12 The Greater Discourse to Sakuludayin 637


effort, arouses energy, exerts his mind, and strives. And thereby
many disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation
and perfection of direct knowledge.

(3. The Four Bases for Spiritual Power)

17. "Again, Udayin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way
to develop the four bases for spiritual power. Here a bhikkhu
develops the basis for spiritual power consisting in concentra-
tion due to zeal and determined striving. He develops the basis
for spiritual power consisting in concentration due to energy
and determined striving. He develops the basis for spiritual
power consisting in concentration due to [purity of] mind and
determined striving. He develops the basis for spiritual power
consisting in concentration due to investigation and deter-
mined striving. And thereby many disciples of mine abide
having reached the consummation and perfection of direct
knowledge.

(4. The Five Faculties)

18. "Again, Udayifi, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to
develop the five spiritual faculties. Here [12] a bhikkhu develops
the faculty of faith, which leads to peace, leads to enlightenment.
He develops the faculty of energy. ..the faculty of mindfulness. ..
the faculty of concentration. . .the faculty of wisdom, which leads
to peace, leads to enlightenment. And thereby many disciples of
mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection of
direct knowledge.


(5. The Five Powers)

19. "Again, Udayin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way
to develop the five powers. Here a bhikkhu develops the power
of faith, which leads to peace, leads to enlightenment. He devel-
ops the power of energy. . .the power of mindfulness. . .the power
of concentration... the power of wisdom, which leads to peace,
leads to enlightenment. And thereby many disciples of mine
abide having reached the consummation and perfection of direct
knowledge.


638 Mahasakuludayi Sutta: Sutta 77


ii 13


(6. The Seven Enlightenment Factors)

20. "Again, Udayin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way
to develop the seven enlightenment factors. Here a bhikkhu
develops the mindfulness enlightenment factor, which is sup-
ported by seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, and results in
relinquishment. He develops the investigation-of-states enlight-
enment factor... the energy enlightenment factor... the rapture
enlightenment factor. ..the tranquillity enlightenment factor...
the concentration enlightenment factor. . .the equanimity enlight-
enment factor, which is supported by seclusion, dispassion, and
cessation, and results in relinquishment. And thereby many dis-
ciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and per-
fection of direct knowledge.


(7. The Noble Eightfold Path)

21. "Again, Udayin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way
to develop the Noble Eightfold Path. Here a bhikkhu develops
right view, right intention, right speech, right action, right liveli-
hood, right effort, right mindfulness, and right concentration.
And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the
consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.

(8. The Eight Liberations)

22. "Again, Udayin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way
to develop the eight liberations. 764 Possessed of material form,
one sees forms: this is the first liberation. Not perceiving form
internally, one sees forms externally: this is the second libera-
tion. One is resolved only upon the beautiful: this is the third
liberation. [13] With the complete surmounting of perceptions of
form, with the disappearance of perceptions of sensory impact,
with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, aware that 'space
is infinite/ one enters upon and abides in the base of infinite
space: this is the fourth liberation. By completely surmounting
the base of infinite space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite/
one enters upon and abides in the base of infinite consciousness:
this is the fifth liberation. By completely surmounting the base of
infinite consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing/ one enters


ii 14


The Greater Discourse to Sakuludayin 639


upon and abides in the base of nothingness: this is the sixth liber-
ation. By completely surmounting the base of nothingness, one
enters upon and abides in the base of neither-perception-nor-
non-perception: this is the seventh liberation. By completely sur-
mounting the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception,
one enters upon and abides in the cessation of perception and
feeling: this is the eighth liberation. And thereby many disciples
of mine abide having reached the consummation and perfection
of direct knowledge.

(9. The Eight Bases for Transcendence)

23. "Again, Udayin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way
to develop the eight bases for transcendence. 765 Perceiving form
internally, one sees forms externally, limited, fair and ugly; by
transcending them, one perceives thus: 'I know, I see.' This is
the first base for transcendence. 766 Perceiving form internally,
one sees forms externally, immeasurable, fair and ugly; by tran-
scending them, one perceives thus: 'I know, I see.' This is the
second base for transcendence. Not perceiving form internally,
one sees forms externally, limited, fair and ugly; by transcend-
ing them, one perceives thus: 'I know, I see.' This is the third
base for transcendence. 767 Not perceiving form internally, one
sees forms externally, immeasurable, fair and ugly; by tran-
scending them, one perceives thus: 'I know, I see.' This is the
fourth base for transcendence. Not perceiving form internally,
one sees forms externally, blue, of blue colour, blue in appear-
ance, with blue luminosity. Just like a flax flower, which is blue,
of blue colour, blue in appearance, with blue luminosity, or just
like Benares cloth smoothened on both sides, which is blue, of
blue colour, blue in appearance, with blue luminosity; so too,
not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally... with
blue luminosity; by transcending them, one perceives thus: 'I
know, I see.' This is the fifth [14] base for transcendence. Not
perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally, yellow, of
yellow colour, yellow in appearance, with yellow luminosity.
Just like a kannikara flower, which is yellow, of yellow colour,
yellow in appearance, with yellow luminosity, or just like
Benares cloth smoothened on both sides, which is yellow, of yel-
low colour, yellow in appearance, with yellow luminosity; so too.


640 Mahasakuludayi Sutta: Sutta 77 ii 15


not perceiving form internally, one sees forms externally... with
yellow luminosity; by transcending them, one perceives thus: 'I
know, I see/ This is the sixth base for transcendence. Not per-
ceiving form externally, one sees forms externally, red, of red
colour, red in appearance, with red luminosity. Just like a hibis-
cus flower, which is red, of red colour, red in appearance, with
red luminosity, or just like Benares cloth smoothened on both
sides, which is red, of red colour, red in appearance, with red
luminosity; so too, not perceiving form internally, one sees
forms externally... with red luminosity; by transcending them,
one perceives thus: T know, I see.' This is the seventh base for
transcendence. Not perceiving form internally, one sees forms
externally, white, of white colour, white in appearance, with
white luminosity. Just like the morning star, which is white, of
white colour, white in appearance, with white luminosity, or
just like Benares cloth smoothened on both sides, which is
white, of white colour, white in appearance, with white lumi-
nosity; so too, not perceiving form internally, one sees forms
externally... with white luminosity; by transcending them, one
perceives thus: 'I know, I see.' This is the eighth base for tran-
scendence. And thereby many disciples of mine abide having
reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.

(20. The Ten Kasinas)

24. "Again, Udayin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way
to develop the ten kasina bases . 768 One contemplates the earth-
kasina above, below, and across, undivided and immeasurable.
Another contemplates the water-kasina... Another contemplates
the fire-kasina... Another contemplates the air-kasina... Another
contemplates the blue-kasina... Another contemplates the yel-
low-kasina... Another contemplates the red-kasina... Another
contemplates the white-kasina... Another contemplates the
space-kasina... Another contemplates the consciousness-kasina
[15] above, below, and across, undivided and immeasurable.
And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the
perfection and consummation of direct knowledge.


The Greater Discourse to Sakuludayin 641


ii 16


(11. The Four fhanas)

25. "Again, Udayin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way
to develop the four jhanas. Here, quite secluded from sensual
pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters
upon and abides in the first jhana, which is accompanied by
applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure bom
of seclusion. He makes the rapture and pleasure bom of seclu-
sion drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no
part of his whole body unpervaded by the rapture and pleasure
born of seclusion. 769 Just as a skilled bath man or a bath man's
apprentice heaps bath powder in a metal basin and, sprinkling it
gradually with water, kneads it till the moisture wets his ball of
bath powder, soaks it and pervades it inside and out, yet the ball
itself does not ooze; so too, a bhikkhu makes the rapture and
pleasure bom of seclusion drench, steep, fill, and pervade this
body, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by
the rapture and pleasure bom of seclusion.

26. "Again, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought,
a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second jhana, which
has self-confidence and singleness of mind without applied and
sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of concentra-
tion. He makes the rapture and pleasure bom of concentration
drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part
of his whole body unpervaded by the rapture and pleasure born
of concentration. Just as though there were a lake whose waters
welled up from below and it had no inflow from east, west,
north, or south [16] and would not be replenished from time to
time by showers of rain, then the cool fount of water welling up
in the lake would make the cool water drench, steep, fill, and.
pervade the lake, so that there would be no part of the whole
lake unpervaded by cool water; so too, a bhikkhu makes the
rapture and pleasure born of concentration drench, steep, fill,
and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body
unpervaded by the rapture and pleasure bom of concentration.

27. "Again, with the fading away as well of rapture, a bhikkhu
abides in equanimity, and mindful and fully aware, still feeling
pleasure with the body, he enters upon and abides in the third
jhana, on account of which noble ones announce: 'He has a
pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.' He makes


642 Mahasakuludayi Sutta: Sutta 77


ii 17


the pleasure divested of rapture drench, steep, fill, and pervade
this body, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded
by the pleasure divested of rapture. Just as in a pond of blue or
red or white lotuses, some lotuses that are bom and grow in the
water thrive immersed in the water without rising out of it, and
cool water drenches, steeps, fills, and pervades them to their tips
and their roots, so that there is no part of all those lotuses unper-
vaded by cool water; so too, a bhikkhu makes the pleasure
divested of rapture drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so
that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the plea-
sure divested of rapture.

28. "Again, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and
with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, a bhikkhu
enters upon and abides in the fourth jhana, which has neither-
pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.
He sits pervading this body with a pure bright mind, so that
there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the pure
bright mind. Just as though a man were sitting covered from the
head down with a white cloth, so that there would be no part of
his whole body not covered by the white cloth; so too, a bhikkhu
sits pervading this body with a pure bright mind, so that there is
no part of his whole body [17] unpervaded by the pure bright
mind. And thereby many disciples of mine abide having
reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.

(12. Insight Knowledge)

29. "Again, Udayin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way
to understand thus: 770 'This body of mine, made of material
form, consisting of the four great elements, procreated by a
mother and father, and built up out of boiled rice and porridge,
is subject to impermanence, to being worn and rubbed away, to
dissolution and disintegration, and this consciousness of mine is
supported by it and bound up with it.' Suppose there were a
beautiful beryl gem of purest water, eight-faceted, well cut, clear
and limpid, possessed of all good qualities, and through it a
blue, yellow, red, white, or brown thread would be strung. Then
a man with good sight, taking it in his hand, might review it
thus: 'This is a beautiful beryl gem of purest water, eight-faceted,
well cut, clear and limpid, possessed of all good qualities, and


ii 18


The Greater Discourse to Sakuludayin 643


through it is strung a blue, yellow, red, white, or brown thread.'
So too, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to understand
thus: 'This body of mine... is subject to impermanence, to being
worn and rubbed away, to dissolution and disintegration, and
this consciousness of mine is supported by it and bound up with
it.' And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached
the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.

(23. The Mind-made Body)

30. "Again, Udayin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way
to create from this body another body having form, mind-made,
with all its limbs, lacking no faculty. Just as though a man were
to pull out a reed from its sheath and think thus: 'This is the
sheath, this is the reed; the sheath is one, the reed is another; it is
from the sheath that the reed has been pulled out'; or just as
though a man were to pull out a sword from its scabbard and
think thus: 'This is the sword, this is the scabbard; the sword is
one, the scabbard another; it is from the scabbard that the sword
has been pulled out'; [18] or just as though a man were to pull a
snake out of its slough and think thus: 'This is the snake, this is
the slough; the snake is one, the slough another; it is from the
slough that the snake has been pulled out.' So too, I have pro-
claimed to my disciples the way to create from this body another
body having form, mind-made, with all its limbs, lacking no fac-
ulty. And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached
the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.

(24. The Kinds of Supernormal Power)

31. "Again, Udayin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way
to wield the various kinds of supernormal power: having been
one, they become many; having been many, they become one;
they appear and vanish; they go unhindered through walls,
through enclosures, through mountains, as though through
space; they dive in and out of the earth as though it were water;
they walk on water without sinking as though it were earth; seat-
ed cross-legged, they travel in space like birds; with their hands
they touch and stroke the moon and sun so powerful and mighty;
they wield bodily mastery even as far as the Brahma-world. Just


644 Mahasakuludayi Sutta: Sutta 77 ii 19


as a skilled potter or his apprentice might create and fashion out
of well-prepared clay any shape of pot he wished; or just as a
skilled ivory-worker or his apprentice might create and fashion
out of well-prepared ivory any ivory work of art he wished; or
just as a skilled goldsmith or his apprentice might create and
fashion out of well-prepared gold any gold work of art he
wished; so too, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to
wield the various kinds of supernormal power... [19]... they
wield bodily mastery even as far as the Brahma-world. And
thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the con-
summation and perfection of direct knowledge.


(15. The Divine Ear Element)

32. "Again, Udayin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way
whereby with the divine ear element, which is purified and sur-
passes the human, they hear both kinds of sounds, the divine
and the human, those that are far as well as near. Just as a vigor-
ous trumpeter might make himself heard without difficulty in
the four quarters; so too, I have proclaimed to my disciples the
way whereby with the divine ear element... far as well as near.
And thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the
consummation and perfection of direct knowledge.


(16. Understanding the Minds of Others)

33. "Again, Udayin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way to
understand the minds of other beings, of other persons, having
encompassed them with their own minds. They understand a
mind affected by lust as affected by lust and a mind unaffected by
lust as unaffected by lust; they understand a mind affected by hate
as affected by hate and a mind unaffected by hate as unaffected by
hate; they understand a mind affected jay delusion as affected by
delusion and a mind unaffected by delusion as unaffected by
delusion; they understand a contracted mind as contracted and a
distracted mind as distracted; they understand an exalted mind as
exalted and an unexalted mind as unexalted; they understand a
surpassed mind as surpassed and an unsurpassed mind as unsur-
passed; they understand a concentrated mind as concentrated
and an unconcentrated mind as unconcentrated; they understand


The Greater Discourse to Sakuludayin 645


ii 21


a liberated mind as liberated and an unliberated mind as unlib-
erated. Just as a man or a woman - young, youthful, and fond of
ornaments - on viewing the image of his or her own face in a
clean bright mirror or in a bowl of clear water, would know if
there were a spot thus: 'There is a spot/ [20] or would know if
there were no spot thus: 'There is no spot'; so too, I have pro-
claimed to my disciples the way to understand... an unliberated
mind as unliberated. And thereby many disciples of mine abide
having reached the consummation and perfection of direct
knowledge.

(17. The Recollection of Past Lives)

34. "Again, Udayin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way
to recollect their manifold past lives, that is, one birth, two
births, three births, four births, five births, ten births, twenty
births, thirty births, forty births, fifty births, a hundred births, a
thousand births, a hundred thousand births, many aeons of
world-contraction, many aeons of world-expansion, many aeons
of world-contraction and expansion: 'There I was so named, of
such a clan, with such an appearance, such was my nutriment,
such my experience of pleasure and pain, such my life-term; and
passing away from there, I reappeared elsewhere; and there too
I was so named... and passing away from there, I reappeared
here.' Thus with their aspects and particulars they recollect their
manifold past lives. Just as a man might go from his own village
to another village and then back again to his own village. He
might think: 'I went from my own village to that village, and
there I stood in such a way, sat in such a way, spoke in such a
way, kept silent in such a way; and from that village I went to
that other village and there [21] I stood in such a way... kept
silent in such a way; and from that village I came back again to
my own village.' So too, I have proclaimed to my disciples the
way to recollect their manifold lives... Thus with their aspects
and particulars they recollect their manifold past lives. And
thereby many disciples of mine abide having reached the con-
summation and perfection of direct knowledge.



646 Mahasakuludayi Sutta: Sutta 77

(18. The Divine Eye)

35. "Again, Udayin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way
whereby with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses
the human, they see beings passing away and reappearing,
inferior and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate.
They understand how beings pass on according to their actions
thus: 'These worthy beings who were ill-conducted in body,
speech, and mind, revilers of noble ones, wrong in their views,
giving effect to wrong view in their actions, on the dissolution
of the body, after death, have reappeared in a state of depriva-
tion, in a bad destination, in perdition, even in hell; but these
worthy beings who were well-conducted in body, speech, and
mind, not revilers of noble ones, right in their views, giving
effect to right view in their actions, on the dissolution of the
body, after death, have reappeared in a good destination, even
in the heavenly world.' Thus with the divine eye, which is puri-
fied and surpasses the human, they see beings passing away
and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate
and unfortunate, and they understand how beings pass on
according to their actions. Just as though there were two houses
with doors and a man with good sight standing there between
them saw people entering the houses and coming out and pass-
ing to and fro. So too, I have proclaimed to my disciples the
way whereby with the divine eye... They .understand how
beings pass on according to their actions. And thereby many
disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and
perfection of direct knowledge. [22]

(19. The Destruction of the Taints)

36. "Again, Udayin, I have proclaimed to my disciples the way
whereby by realising for themselves with direct knowledge, they
here and now enter upon and abide in the deliverance of mind
and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruc-
tion of the taints. Just as if there were a lake in a mountain recess,
clear, limpid, and undisturbed, so that a man with good sight
standing on the bank could see shells, gravel, and pebbles, and
also shoals of fish swimming about and resting. He might think:
'There is this lake, clear, limpid, and undisturbed, and there are



ii 22


The Greater Discourse to Sakuludayin 64 7


these shells, gravel, and pebbles, and also these shoals of fish
swimming about and resting.' So too, I have proclaimed to my
disciples the way whereby by realising for themselves with
direct knowledge, they here and now enter upon and abide in
the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom that are
taintless with the destruction of the taints. And thereby many
disciples of mine abide having reached the consummation and
perfection of direct knowledge.

37. "This, Udayin, is the fifth quality because of which my dis-
ciples honour, respect, revere, and venerate me, and live in
dependence on me, honouring and respecting me.

38. "These, Udayin, are the five qualities because of which my
disciples honour, respect, revere, and venerate me, and live in
dependence on me, honouring and respecting me."

That is what the Blessed One said. The wanderer Udayin was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


78 Samanamandika Sutta
Samanamandikaputta


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was living
at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. Now on that
occasion the wanderer Uggahamana Samanamandikaputta was
staying in Mallika's Park, the single-hailed Tinduka plantation for
philosophical debates, 771 [23] together with a large following of
wanderers, with as many as three hundred wanderers.

2. The carpenter Pancakanga went out from SavatthI at mid-
day in order to see the Blessed One. Then he thought: "It is not
the right time to see the Blessed One; he is still in retreat. And it
is not the right time to see bhikkhus worthy of esteem; they are
still in retreat. Suppose I went to Mallika's Park, to the wanderer
Uggahamana Samanamandikaputta?" And he went to
Mallika's Park.

3. Now on that occasion the wanderer Uggahamana was seat-
ed with a large assembly of wanderers who were making an
uproar, loudly and noisily talking many kinds of pointless talk,
such as talk of kings ... (as Sutta 76, §4 )... whether things are so or
are not so.

The wanderer Uggahamana Samanamandikaputta saw the
carpenter Pancakanga coming in the distance. Seeing him, he
quieted his own assembly thus: "Sirs, be quiet; sirs make no
noise. Here comes the carpenter Pancakanga, a disciple of the
recluse Gotama, one of the recluse Gotama's white-clothed lay
disciples staying at SavatthI. These venerable ones like quiet;
they are disciplined in quiet; they commend quiet. Perhaps if he
finds our assembly a quiet one, he will think to join us." Then
the wanderers became silent.

4. The carpenter Pancakanga went to the wanderer
Uggahamana and exchanged greetings with him. [24] When this


648


ii 25


Samanamandikaputta 649


courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one
side. The wanderer Uggahamana then said to him:

5. "Carpenter, when a man possesses four qualities, I describe
him as accomplished in what is wholesome, perfected in what is
wholesome, attained to the supreme attainment, an ascetic
invincible. What are the four? Here he does no evil bodily
actions, he utters no evil speech, he has no evil intentions, and
he does not make his living by any evil livelihood. When a man
possesses these four qualities, I describe him as accomplished in
what is wholesome, perfected in what is wholesome, attained to
the supreme attainment, an ascetic invincible."

6. Then the carpenter Pancakanga neither approved nor disap-
proved of the wanderer Uggahamana's words. Without doing
either he rose from his seat and went away, thinking: "I shall
learn the meaning of this statement in the presence of the
Blessed One."

7. Then he went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage
to him, he sat down at one side and reported to the Blessed One
his entire conversation with the wanderer Uggahamana. There-
upon the Blessed One said:

8. "If that were so, carpenter, then a young tender infant lying
prone is accomplished in what is wholesome, perfected in what
is wholesome, attained to the supreme attainment, an ascetic
invincible, according to the wanderer Uggahamana's statement;'
For a young tender infant lying prone does not even have the
notion 'body/ so how should he do an evil action beyond mere
wriggling? A young tender infant lying prone does not even
have the notion 'speech/ so how should he utter evil speech
beyond mere whining? A young tender infant lying prone
does not even have the notion 'intention,' so how should he
have evil intentions beyond mere sulking? A young tender
infant lying prone does not even have the notion 'livelihood/
so how [25] should he make his living by evil livelihood
beyond being suckled at his mother's breast? If that were so,
carpenter, then a young tender infant lying prone is accom-
plished in what is wholesome... according to the wanderer
Uggahamana's statement.

"When a man possesses four qualities, carpenter, I describe
him, not as accomplished in what is wholesome or perfected in


650 Samanamandika Sutta: Sutta 78


ii 26


what is wholesome or attained to the supreme attainment or an
ascetic invincible, but as one who stands in the same category as
the young tender infant lying prone. What are the four? Here he
does no evil bodily actions, he utters no evil speech, he has no
evil intentions, and he does not make his living by any evil
livelihood. When a man possesses these four qualities, I describe
him, not as accomplished... but as one who stands in the same
category as the young tender infant lying prone.

9. "When a man possesses ten qualities, carpenter, I describe
him as accomplished in what is wholesome, perfected in what is
wholesome, attained to the supreme attainment, an ascetic
invincible. [But first of all] I say, it must be understood thus: 772
'These are unwholesome habits/ and thus: 'Unwholesome habits
originate from this,' and thus: 'Unwholesome habits cease with-
out remainder here,' and thus: 'One practising in this way is
practising the way to the cessation of unwholesome habits.' And
I say, it must be understood thus: 'These are wholesome habits/
and thus: 'Wholesome habits originate from this/ and thus:
'Wholesome habits cease without remainder here/ and thus:
'One practising in this way is practising the way to the cessation
of wholesome habits.' And I say, it must be understood thus:
'These are unwholesome intentions/ and thus 'Unwholesome
intentions originate from this,' [26] and thus: 'Unwholesome
intentions cease without remainder here/ and thus 'One practis-
ing in this way is practising the way to the cessation of unwhole-
some intentions.' And l say, it must be understood thus: 'These
are wholesome intentions/ and thus: 'Wholesome intentions
originate from this/ and thus: 'Wholesome intentions cease
without remainder here/ and thus: 'One practising in this way is
practising the way to the cessation of wholesome intentions.'

10. "What are unwholesome habits? They are unwholesome
bodily actions, unwholesome verbal actions, and evil livelihood.
These are called unwholesome habits.

"And what do these unwholesome habits originate from?
Their origin is stated: they should be said to originate from
mind. What mind? Though mind is multiple, varied, and of dif-
ferent aspects, there is mind affected by lust, by hate, and by
delusion. Unwholesome habits originate from this.

"And where do these unwholesome habits cease without
remainder? Their cessation is stated: here a bhikkhu abandons


ii 27


Samanamandikaputta 651


bodily misconduct and develops good bodily conduct; he aban-
dons verbal misconduct and develops good verbal conduct; he
abandons mental misconduct and develops good mental con-
duct; he abandons wrong livelihood and gains a living by right
livelihood. 773 It is here that unwholesome habits cease without
remainder.

"And how practising does he practise the way to the cessation
of unwholesome habits? Here a bhikkhu awakens zeal for the
non-arising of unarisen evil unwholesome states and he makes
effort, arouses energy, exerts his mind, and strives. He awakens
zeal for the abandoning of arisen evil unwholesome states... He
awakens zeal for the arising of unarisen wholesome states... He
awakens zeal for the continuance, non-disappearance, strength-
ening, increase, and fulfilment by development of arisen whole-
some states, and he makes effort, arouses energy, exerts his
mind, and strives. [27] One so practising practises the way to the
cessation of unwholesome habits. 774

11. "What are wholesome habits? They are wholesome bodily
actions, wholesome verbal actions, and purification of liveli-
hood. These are called wholesome habits.

"And what do these wholesome habits originate from? Their
origin is stated: they should be said to originate from mind.
What mind? Though mind is multiple, varied, and of different
aspects, there is mind unaffected by lust, by hate, or by delu-
sion. Wholesome habits originate from this.

"And where do these wholesome habits cease without
remainder? Their cessation is stated: here a bhikkhu is virtuous,
but he does not identify with his virtue, and he understands as it
actually is that deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom
where these wholesome habits cease without remainder. 775

"And how practising does he practise the way to the cessation
of wholesome habits? Here a bhikkhu awakens zeal for the non-
arising of unarisen evil unwholesome states... for the continu-
ance, non-disappearance, strengthening, increase, and fulfilment
by development of arisen wholesome states, and he makes
effort, arouses energy, exerts his mind, and strives. One so prac-
tising practises the way to the cessation of wholesome habits. 776

12. "What are unwholesome intentions? They are the intention
of sensual desire, the intention of ill will, and the intention of
cruelty. These are called unwholesome intentions.


652 Samanamandika Sutta: Sutta 78


ii 28


"And what do these unwholesome intentions originate from?
Their origin is stated: they should be said to originate from per-
ception. What perception? Though perception is multiple, var-
ied, and of different aspects, there is perception of sensual
desire, perception of ill will, and perception of cruelty.
Unwholesome intentions originate from this.

"And where do these unwholesome intentions cease without
remainder? Their cessation is stated: here, quite secluded from
sensual pleasures, secluded from [28] unwholesome states, a
bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the first jhana, which is
accompanied by applied and sustained thought, with rapture
and pleasure born of seclusion. It is here that unwholesome
intentions cease without remainder. 777

"And how practising does he practise the way to the cessation
of unwholesome intentions? Here a bhikkhu awakens zeal for
the non-arising of unarisen evil unwholesome states... for the
continuance, non-disappearance, strengthening, increase, and
fulfilment by development of arisen wholesome states, and he
makes effort, arouses energy, exerts his mind, and strives. One
so practising practises the way to the cessation of unwholesome
intentions. 778

13. "What are wholesome intentions? They are the intention of
renunciation, the intention of non-ill will, and the intention of
non-cruelty. These are called wholesome intentions.

"And what do these wholesome intentions originate from?
Their origin is stated: they*. should be said to originate from per-
ception. What perception? Though perception is multiple, var-
ied, and of different aspects, there is perception of renunciation,
perception of non-ill will, and perception of non-cruelty.
Wholesome intentions originate from this.

"And where do these wholesome intentions cease without
remainder? Their cessation is stated: here with the stilling of
applied and sustained thought, a bhikkhu enters upon and
abides in the second jhana, which has self-confidence and sin-
gleness of mind without applied and sustained thought, with
rapture and pleasure bom of concentration. It is here that these
wholesome intentions cease without remainder. 779

"And how practising does he practise the way to the cessa-
tion of wholesome intentions? Here a bhikkhu awakens zeal for
the non-arising of unarisen evil unwholesome states... for the


Samanamandikaputta 653


ii 29


continuance, non-disappearance, strengthening, increase, and
fulfilment by development of arisen wholesome states, and he
makes effort, arouses energy, exerts his mind, and strives. One
so practising practises the way to the cessation of wholesome
intentions. 780

14. "Now, carpenter, when a man possesses what ten qualities
[29] do I describe him as accomplished in what is wholesome,
perfected in what is wholesome, attained to the supreme attain-
ment, an ascetic invincible? Here a bhikkhu possesses the right
view of one beyond training, 781 the right intention of one
beyond training, the right speech of one beyond training, the
right action of one beyond training, the right livelihood of one
beyond training, the right effort of one beyond training, the
right mindfulness of one beyond training, the right concentra-
tion of one beyond training, the right knowledge of one beyond
training, and the right deliverance of one beyond training. When
a man possesses these ten qualities, I describe him as accom-
plished in what is wholesome, perfected in what is wholesome,
attained to the supreme attainment, an ascetic invincible."

That is what the Blessed One said. The carpenter Pancakanga
was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


79 Culasakuludayi Sutta
The Shorter Discourse to Sakuludayin


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Rajagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels' Sanctuary.
Now on that occasion the wanderer Sakuludayin was staying in
the Peacocks' Sanctuary, the wanderers' park, with a large
assembly of wanderers.

2. Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One dressed, and
taking his bowl and outer robe, went to Rajagaha for alms. Then
he thought: "It is still too early to wander for alms in Rajagaha.
Suppose I went to the wanderer Sakuludayin in the Peacocks'
Sanctuary, the wanderers' park."

3-4. Then the Blessed One went to the Peacocks' Sanctuary,
the wanderers' park. Now on that occasion the wanderer
Sakuludayin was seated with a large assembly of wanderers
who were making an uproar. ..(as Sutta 77, §§4-5) [30], .."For
what discussion are you sitting together here now, Udayin? And
what was your discussion that was interrupted?"

5. "Venerable sir, let be the discussion for which we are now
sitting together here. The Blessed One can well hear about it
later. Venerable sir, when I do not come to this assembly, then it
sits talking many kinds of pointless talk. But when I have come
to this assembly, then it sits looking up to me, thinking: 'Let us
hear the Dhamma that the recluse Udayin expounds.' However,
when [31] the Blessed One comes, then both I and this assembly
sit looking up to the Blessed One, thinking: 'Let us hear the
Dhamma that the Blessed One expounds.'"

6. "Then, Udayin, suggest something that I should speak about."

"Venerable sir, in recent days there was one claiming to be

omniscient and all-seeing, to have complete knowledge and
vision thus: 'Whether I am walking or standing or sleeping or
awake, knowledge and vision are continuously and uninterrupt'


654


ii 32


The Shorter Discourse to Sakuludayin 655


edly present to me.' When I asked him a question about the
past, he prevaricated, led the talk aside, and showed anger, hate,
and bitterness. Then I remembered the Blessed One thus: 'Ah,
surely it is the Blessed One, surely it is the Sublime One who is
skilled in these things.'"

"But, Udayin, who was it that claimed to be omniscient and
all-seeing... yet when asked a question by you about the past,
prevaricated, led the talk aside, and showed anger, hate, and
bitterness?"

"It was the Nigantha Nataputta, venerable sir."

7. "Udayin, if someone should recollect his manifold past
lives, that is, one birth, two births... thus, with their aspects and
particulars, should he recollect his manifold past lives, then
either he might ask me a question about the past or I might ask
him a question about the past, and he might satisfy my mind
with his answer to my question or I might satisfy his mind with
my answer to his question. If someone with the divine eye,
which is purified and surpasses the human, should see beings
passing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair and
ugly, fortunate and unfortunate... and understand how beings
pass on according to their actions, then either he might ask me a
question about the future [32] or I might ask him a question
about the future, and he might satisfy my mind with his answer
to my question or I might satisfy his mind with my answer to
his question. But let be the past, Udayin, let be the future. I shall
teach you the Dhamma: When this exists, that comes to be; with
the arising of this, that arises. When this does not exist, that does
not come to be; with the cessation of this, that ceases." 782

8. "Venerable sir, I cannot even recollect with their aspects and
particulars all that I have experienced within this present exis-
tence, so how should I recollect my manifold past lives, that is,
one birth, two births... with their aspects and particulars, as the
Blessed One does? And I cannot now even see a mud-goblin, so
how should I with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses
the human, see beings passing away and reappearing, inferior
and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate... and
understand how beings pass on according to their actions, as the
Blessed One does? But, venerable sir, when the Blessed One told
me: 'But let be the past, Udayin, let be the future. I shall teach you
the Dhamma: When this exists, that comes to be; with the arising


656 Culasakuludayi Sutta: Sutta 79 ii 33

of this, that arises. When this does not exist, that does not come to
be; with the cessation of this, that ceases' - that is even more
unclear to me. Perhaps, venerable sir, I might satisfy the Blessed
One's mind by answering a question about our own teachers'
doctrine."

9. "Well, Udayin, what is taught in your own teachers' doctrine?"

"Venerable sir, it is taught that in our own teachers' doctrine:

'This is the perfect splendour, this is the perfect splendour!'"

"But, Udayin, since it is taught in your own teachers' doctrine:
'This is the perfect splendour, this is the perfect splendour!' -
what is that perfect splendour?"

"Venerable sir, that splendour is the perfect splendour which is
unsurpassed by any other splendour higher or more sublime."

"But, Udayin, what is that splendour which is unsurpassed by
any other splendour higher or more sublime?" [33]

"Venerable sir, that splendour is the perfect splendour which is
unsurpassed by any other splendour higher or more sublime."

10. "Udayin, you might continue for a long time in this way.
You say: 'Venerable sir, that splendour is the perfect splendour
which is unsurpassed by any other splendour higher or more
sublime,' yet you do not indicate what that splendour is.
Suppose a man were to say: 'I am in love with the most beauti-
ful girl in this country.' Then they would ask him: 'Good man,
that most beautiful girl in this country with whom you are in
love - do you know whether she is from the noble class or the
brahmin class or the merchant class or the worker class?' and he
would reply: 'No.' TheVi they would ask him: 'Good man, that
most beautiful girl in this country with whom you are in love -
do you know her name and clan?... Whether she is tall or short
or of middle height?... Whether she is dark or brown or golden-
skinned?... What village or town or city she lives in?' and he
would reply: 'No.' And then they would ask him: 'Good man,
do you then love a girl you have never known or seen?' and he
would reply: 'Yes.' What do you think, Udayin, that being so,
would not that man's talk amount to nonsense?"

"Surely, venerable sir, that being so, that man's talk would
amount to nonsense."

"But in the same way, Udayin, you say thus: 'That splendour
is the perfect splendour which is unsurpassed by any other
splendour higher or more sublime,' yet you do not indicate



ii 35


The Shorter Discourse to Sakuludayin 657


what that splendour is."

11. "Venerable sir, just as a beautiful beryl gem of purest
water, eight-faceted, well cut, lying on red brocade, glows, radi-
ates, and shines, of such splendour is the self [surviving] unim-
paired after death." 783

12. "What do you think, Udayin? This beautiful beryl gem of
purest water, eight-faceted, well cut, lying on red brocade, [34]
which glows, radiates, and shines, or a glowworm in the thick
darkness of the night - of these two, which gives off the splen-
dour that is more excellent and sublime?" - "The glowworm in
the thick darkness of the night, venerable sir."

13. "What do you think, Udayin? This glowworm in the thick
darkness of the night or an oil-lamp in the thick darkness of the
night - of these two, which gives off the splendour that is more
excellent and sublime?" - "The oil-lamp, venerable sir."

14. "What do you think, Udayin? This oil-lamp in the thick
darkness of the night or a great bonfire in the thick darkness of
the night - of these two, which gives off the splendour that is
more excellent and sublime?" - "The great bonfire, venerable sir."

15. "What do you think, Udayin? This great bonfire in the
thick darkness of the night or the morning star towards dawn in
a clear cloudless sky - of these two, which gives off the splen-
dour that is more excellent and sublime?" - "The morning star
towards dawn in a clear cloudless sky, venerable sir."

16. "What do you think, Udayin? The morning star towards
dawn in a clear cloudless sky or the full moon at midnight in a
clear cloudless sky on the Uposatha day of the fifteenth - of
these two, which gives off the splendour that is more excellent
and sublime?" - "The full moon at midnight in a clear cloudless
sky on the Uposatha day of the fifteenth, venerable sir." [35]

17. "What do you think, Udayin? The full moon at midnight in
a clear cloudless sky on the Uposatha day of the fifteenth, or the
full disk of the sun at midday in a clear cloudless sky in autumn
in the last month of the rainy season - of these two, which gives
off the splendour that is more excellent and sublime?" - "The
full disk of the sun at midday in a clear cloudless sky in autumn
in the last month of the rainy season, venerable sir."

18. "Beyond this, Udayin, I know of very many gods [whose
splendour] the radiance of the sun and moon does not match, yet
I do not say that there is no other splendour higher or more sub-


658 Culasakuludayi Sutta: Sutta 79 ii 36

lime than that splendour. But you, Udayin, say of that splendour
which is lower and meaner than a glowworm's: 'This is the per-
fect splendour/ yet you do not indicate what that splendour is."

19. "The Blessed One has terminated the discussion; the
Sublime One has terminated the discussion."

"But, Udayin, why do you say that?"

"Venerable sir, it is taught in our own teachers' doctrine: 'This
is the perfect splendour, this is the perfect splendour.' But on
being pressed and questioned and cross-questioned about our
own teachers' doctrine by the Blessed One, we are found empty,
hollow, and mistaken."

20. "How is it, Udayin, is there an entirely pleasant world? Is
there a practical way to realise an entirely pleasant world?"

"Venerable sir, it is taught in our own teachers' doctrine:
'There is an entirely pleasant world; there is a practical way to
realise an entirely pleasant world.'"

21. "But, Udayin, what is that practical way to realise an
entirely pleasant world?"

"Here, venerable sir, abandoning the killing of living beings,
someone abstains from killing living beings; abandoning the
taking of what is not given, he abstains from taking what is not
given; abandoning misconduct in sensual pleasures, he abstains
from misconduct in sensual pleasures; [36] abandoning false
speech, he abstains from false speech; or else he undertakes and
practises some kind of asceticism. This is the practical way to
realise an entirely pleasant world."

22. "What do you think, Udayin? On an occasion when he
abandons the killing of living beings and abstains from killing
living beings, does his self then feel only pleasure or both plea-
sure and pain?"

"Both pleasure and pain, venerable sir."

"What do you think, Udayin? On an occasion when he aban-
dons the taking of what is not given and abstains from taking
what is not given... when he abandons misconduct in sensual
pleasures and abstains from misconduct in sensual pleasures...
when he abandons false speech and abstains from false speech,
does his self then feel only pleasure or both pleasure and pain?"

"Both pleasure and pain, venerable sir."

"What do you think, Udayin? On an occasion when he under-


ii 37


The Shorter Discourse to Sakuludayin 659


takes and practises some kind of asceticism, does his self then
feel only pleasure or both pleasure and pain?"

"Both pleasure and pain, venerable sir."

"What do you think, Udayin? Does the realisation of an entirely
pleasant world come about by following a way of mixed plea-
sure and pain?"

23. "The Blessed One has terminated the discussion; the
Sublime One has terminated the discussion."

"But, Udayin, why do you say that?"

"Venerable sir, it is taught in our own teachers' doctrine:
'There is an entirely pleasant world; there is a practical way to
realise an entirely pleasant world.' But on being pressed and
questioned and cross-questioned about our own teachers' doc-
trine by the Blessed One, we are found empty, hollow, and
mistaken. But how is it, venerable sir, is there an entirely pleas-
ant world? Is there a practical way to realise an entirely pleas-
ant world?" [37]

24. "There is an entirely pleasant world, Udayin; there is a
practical way to realise an entirely pleasant world."

"Venerable sir, what is that practical way to realise an entirely
pleasant world?"

25. "Here, Udayin, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and
abides in the first jhana...With the stilling of applied and sus-
tained thought, he enters upon and abides in the second
jhana...in the third jhana...This is the practical way to realise an
entirely pleasant world."

"Venerable sir, that is not the practical way to realise an
entirely pleasant world; at that point an entirely pleasant world
has already been realised."

"Udayin, at that point an entirely pleasant world has not yet
been realised; that is only the practical way to realise an entirely
pleasant world."

26. When this was said, the wanderer Sakuludayin's assem-
bly made an uproar, saying very loudly and noisily: "We are
lost along with our own teachers' doctrines! We are lost along
with our own teachers' doctrines! We know nothing higher
than that!" 784

Then the wanderer Sakuludayin quieted those wanderers and


660 Culasakuludayi Sutta: Sutta 79 ii 33

asked the Blessed One:

27. "Venerable sir, at what point is an entirely pleasant world
realised?"

"Here, Udayin, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain,
and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, a bhikkhu
enters upon and abides in the fourth jhana, which has neither-
pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.
He dwells with those deities who have arisen in an entirely
pleasant world and he talks with them and enters into conversa-
tion with them . 785 It is at this point that an entirely pleasant
world has been realised."

28. "Venerable sir, surely it is for the sake of realising that
entirely pleasant world that bhikkhus lead the holy life under
the Blessed One."

"It is not for the sake of realising that entirely pleasant world
that bhikkhus lead the holy life under me. There are other states,
Udayin, higher and more sublime [than that] and it is for the sake
of realising them that bhikkhus lead the holy life under me." [38]

"What are those higher and more sublime states, venerable
sir, for the sake of realising which bhikkhus lead the holy life
under the Blessed One?"

29-36. "Here, Udayin, a Tathagata appears in the world,
accomplished, fully enlightened ... (as Sutta 51, §§12-19). ..he
purifies his mind from doubt.

37. "Having thus abandoned these five hindrances, imperfec-
tions of the mind that weaken wisdom, quite secluded from sen-
sual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu
enters upon and abides in the first jhana... This, Udayin, is a
higher and more sublime state for the sake of realising which
bhikkhus lead the holy life under me.

38-40. "Again, with the stilling of applied and sustained
thought, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second
jhana... the third jhana... the fourth jhana. This too, Udayin, is a
higher and more sublime state for the sake of realising which
bhikkhus lead the holy life under me.

41. "When his concentrated mind is thus purified, bright,
unblemished, rid of imperfection, malleable, wieldy, steady, and
attained to imperturbability, he directs it to knowledge of the
recollection of past lives. He recollects his manifold past lives,
that is, one birth, two births ... (as Sutta 51, §24 )... Thus with their



ii 39


The Shorter Discourse to Sakuludayin 661


aspects and particulars he recollects his manifold past lives. This
too, Udayin, is a higher and more sublime state for the sake of
realising which bhikkhus lead the holy life under me.

42. “When his concentrated mind is thus purified, bright,
unblemished, rid of imperfection, malleable, wieldy, steady, and
attained to imperturbability, he directs it to knowledge of the
passing away and reappearance of beings... (as Sutta 51, §25)...
Thus with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the
human, he sees beings passing away and reappearing, inferior
and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and he
understands how beings pass on according to their actions. This
too, Udayin, is a higher and more sublime state for the sake of
realising which bhikkhus lead the holy life under me.

43. “When his concentrated mind is thus purified, bright,
unblemished, rid of imperfection, malleable, wieldy, steady, and
attained to imperturbability, he directs it to knowledge of the
destruction of the taints. He understands as it actually is : 'This
is suffering'... (as Sutta 51, §26) [39]... He understands as it actu-
ally is: 'This is the way leading to the cessation of the taints.'

44. "When he knows and sees thus, his mind is liberated from
the taint of sensual desire, from the taint of being, and from the
taint of ignorance. When it is liberated there comes the knowl-
edge: 'It is liberated.' He understands: 'Birth is destroyed, the
holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done,
there is no more coming to any state of being.' This too, Udayin,
is a higher and more sublime state for the sake of realising
which bhikkhus lead the holy life under me.

"These, Udayin, are those higher and more sublime states for
the sake of realising which bhikkhus lead the holy life under me."

45. When this was said, the wanderer Sakuludayin said to the
Blessed One: "Magnificent, venerable sir! Magnificent, venerable
sir! The Blessed One has made the Dhamma clear in many ways,
as though he were turning upright what had been overthrown,
revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one who was
lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with eyesight to
see forms. I go to the Blessed One for refuge and to the Dhamma
and to the Sangha of bhikkhus. I would receive the going forth
under the Blessed One, venerable sir, I would receive the full
admission."

46. When this was said, the wanderer Sakuludayin's assembly



662 Culasakuludayi Sutta: Sutta 79


ii 39


addressed him thus: "Do not lead the holy life under the recluse
Gotama, Master Udayin. Having been a teacher. Master Udayin,
do not live as a pupil. For Master Udayin to do so would be as if
a water jug were to become a pitcher. Do not lead the holy life
under the recluse Gotama, Master Udayin. Having been a
teacher. Master Udayin, do not live as a pupil."

That is how the wanderer Sakuludayin's assembly obstructed
him from leading the holy life under the Blessed One. 786



80 Vekhanassa Sutta
To Vekhanassa


[40] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was
living at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.

2. Then the wanderer Vekhanassa went to the Blessed One
and exchanged greetings with him. 787 When this courteous and
amiable talk was finished, he stood at one side and in the
Blessed One's presence he uttered this exclamation:

"This is the perfect splendour, this is the perfect splendour!"

"But, Kaccana, why do you say: "This is the perfect splendour,
this is the perfect splendour!'? What is that perfect splendour?"

"Master Gotama, that splendour is the perfect splendour which
is unsurpassed by any other splendour higher or more sublime."

"But, Kaccana, what is that splendour that is unsurpassed by
any other splendour higher or more sublime?"

"Master Gotama, that splendour is the perfect splendour that is
unsurpassed by any other splendour higher or more sublime."

3-11. "Kaccana, you might continue for a long time in this
•way. ..(as Sutta 79, §§20— IS) . . . [41, 42] yet you do not indicate
what that splendour is.

12. "Kaccana, there are these five cords of sensual pleasure. 788
What five? Forms cognizable by the eye that are wished for,
desired, agreeable, and likeable, connected with sensual desire
and provocative of lust. Sounds cognizable by the ear... Odours
cognizable by the nose... Flavours cognizable by the tongue...
Tangibles cognizable by the body [43] that are wished for, desired,
agreeable, and likeable, connected with sensual desire and
provocative of lust. These are the five cords of sensual pleasure.

13. "Now, Kaccana, the pleasure and joy that arise dependent
on these five cords of sensual pleasure are called sensual plea-
sure. Thus sensual pleasure [arises] through sensual pleasures.


663


664 Vekhanassa Sutta: Sutta 80


ii 44


but beyond sensual pleasure there is a pleasure higher than the
sensual, and that is declared to be the highest among them." 789

14. When this was said, the wanderer Vekhanassa said: "It is
wonderful. Master Gotama, it is marvellous, how well that has
been expressed by Master Gotama: 'Thus sensual pleasure [arises]
through sensual pleasures, but beyond sensual pleasure there is
a pleasure higher than the sensual, and that is declared to be the
highest among them.'"

"Kaccana, for you who are of another view, who accept
another teaching, who approve of another teaching, who pur-
sue a different training, who follow a different teacher, it is
hard to know what sensuality is, or what sensual pleasure is, or
what the pleasure higher than the sensual is. But those
bhikkhus who are arahants with taints destroyed, who have
lived the holy life, done what had to be done, laid down the
burden, reached the true goal, destroyed the fetters of being,
and are completely liberated through final knowledge - it is
they who would know what sensuality is, what sensual plea-
sure is, and what the pleasure higher than the sensual is."

15. When this was said, the wanderer Vekhanassa was angry
and displeased, and he reviled, disparaged, and censured the
Blessed One, saying: "The recluse Gotama will be worsted." He
then said to the Blessed One: "So then there are some recluses
and brahmins here who, without knowing the past and without
seeing the future, yet claim: 'Birth is destroyed, the holy life has
been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more
coming to any state of being.' What they say turns out to be
ridiculous; it turns out to be mere words, empty and hollow."

16. "If any recluses and brahmins [44], without knowing the
past and without seeing the future, yet claim: 'Birth is
destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has
been done, there is no more coming to any state of being/ they
can be confuted in accordance with the Dhamma. Rather, let the
past be, Kaccana, and let the future be. Let a wise man come,
one who is honest and sincere, a man of rectitude. I instruct him,
I teach him the Dhamma in such a way that by practising as
instructed he will soon know and see for himself: "Thus, indeed,
there rightly comes to be liberation from the bond, that is, from
the bond of ignorance.' Suppose, Kaccana, there were a young
tender infant lying prone, bound by stout bonds [at the four


ii 44


To Vekhanassa 665


limbs] with the fifth at the neck; and later on, as a result of his
growth and the maturing of his faculties, those bonds loosened,
then he would know 'I am free' and there would be no more
bondage. So too, let a wise man come... 'Thus, indeed, there
rightly comes to be liberation from the bond, that is, from the
bond of ignorance.'"

17. When this was said, the wanderer Vekhanassa said to the
Blessed One: "Magnificent, Master Gotama! Magnificent, Master
Gotama! Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear... (as Sutta
79, §19 )... for those with eyesight to see forms. I go to Master
Gotama for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of
bhikkhus. From today let the Blessed One remember me as a lay
follower who has gone to him for refuge for life."



4

The Division on Kings

(Rajavagga)



81 Ghatikara Sutta
Ghatlkara the Potter


[45] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was
wandering among the Kosalans together with a large Sangha of
bhikkhus.

2. Then in a certain place beside the main road the Blessed
One smiled. It occurred to the venerable Ananda: "What is the
reason, what is the cause, for the Blessed One's smile? Tatha-
gatas do not smile for no reason." So he arranged his upper robe
on one shoulder, and extending his hands in reverential saluta-
tion towards the Blessed One, asked him: "Venerable sir, what is
the reason, what is the cause, for the Blessed One's smile?
Tathagatas do not smile for no reason."

3. "Once, Ananda, in this place there was a prosperous and
busy market town called Vebhalinga, with many inhabitants
and crowded with people. Now the Blessed One Kassapa,
accomplished and fully enlightened, lived near the market town
Vebhalinga. It was here, in fact, that the Blessed One Kassapa,
accomplished and fully enlightened, had his monastery; it was
here, in fact, that the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and
fully enlightened, resided and advised the Sangha of bhikkhus."

4. Then the venerable Ananda folded his patchwork cloak in
four, and spreading it out, said to the Blessed One: "Then, vener-
able sir, let the Blessed One be seated. Thus this place will have
been used by two Accomplished Ones, Fully Enlightened Ones."

The Blessed One sat down on the seat that had been made
ready and addressed the venerable Ananda thus:

5. "Once, Ananda, in this place there was a prosperous and busy
market town called Vebhalinga, with many inhabitants and
crowded with people. Now the Blessed One Kassapa, accom-
plished and fully enlightened, lived near the market town
Vebhalinga. It was here, in fact, that the Blessed One Kassapa,


669


670 Ghattkara Sutta: Sutta 81


ii 47


accomplished and fully enlightened, had his monastery; it was
here, in fact, that the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully
enlightened, resided [46] and advised the Sangha of bhikkhus.

6. "In Vebhalinga the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and
fully enlightened, had as a supporter, as his chief supporter, a
potter named Ghatikara. Ghatlkara the potter had as a friend, as
his close friend, a brahmin student named Jotipala. 790

"One day the potter Ghatikara addressed the brahmin student
Jotipala thus: 'My dear Jotipala, let us go and see the Blessed
One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened. I hold that it
is good to see that Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlight-
ened.' The brahmin student Jotipala replied: 'Enough, my dear
Ghatlkara, what is the use of seeing that bald-pated recluse?'

"A second and third time the potter Ghatlkara said: 'My dear
Jotipala, let us go and see the Blessed One Kassapa, accom-
plished and fully enlightened. I hold that it is good to see that
Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened.' And a sec-
ond and a third time the brahmin student Jotipala replied:
'Enough, my dear Ghatlkara, what is the use of seeing that bald-
pated recluse?' - 'Then, my dear Jotipala, let us take a loofah
and bath powder and go to the river to bathe.' - 'Very well/
Jotipala replied.

7. "So the potter Ghatlkara and the brahmin student Jotipala
took a loofah and bath powder and went to the river to bathe.
Then Ghatlkara said to Jotipala: 'My dear Jotipala, there is the
monastery of the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully
enlightened, quite nearby. Let us go and see the Blessed One
Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened. I hold that it is
good to see that Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlight-
ened.' Jotipala replied: 'Enough, my dear Ghatlkara, what is [47]
the use of seeing that bald-pated recluse?'

"A second and a third time Ghatlkara said: 'My dear Jotipala,
there is the monastery of the Blessed One Kassapa...' And a sec-
ond and a third time the brahmin student Jotipala replied:
'Enough, my dear Ghatikara, what is the use of seeing that bald-
pated recluse?' 791

8. "Then the potter Ghatlkara seized the brahmin student
Jotipala by the belt and said: 'My dear Jotipala, there is the
monastery of the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully
enlightened, quite nearby. Let us go and see the Blessed One


ii 48


Ghatikara the Potter 671


Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened. I hold that it is
good to see that Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlight-
ened.' Then the brahmin student Jotipala undid his belt and
said: 'Enough, my dear Ghatikara, what is the use of seeing that
bald-pated recluse?'

9. "Then, when the brahmin student Jotipala had washed his
head, the potter Ghatikara seized him by the hair and said: 792
'My dear Jotipala, there is the monastery of the Blessed One
Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened, quite nearby. Let
us go and see the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully
enlightened. I hold that it is good to see that Blessed One,
accomplished and fully enlightened/

"Then the brahmin student Jotipala thought: 'It is wonderful,
it is marvellous that this potter Ghatikara, who is of a different
birth, should presume to seize me by the hair when we have
washed our heads! Surely this can be no simple matter.' And he
said to the potter Ghatikara: 'You go as far as this, my dear
Ghatikara?' - 'I go as far as this, my dear Jotipala; for so much
[48] do I hold that it is good to see that Blessed One, accom-
plished and fully enlightened!' - 'Then, my dear Ghatikara, let
go of me. Let us visit him.'

10. "So Ghatikara the potter and Jotipala the brahmin student
went to the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully
enlightened. Ghatikara, after paying homage to him, sat down
at one side, while Jotipala exchanged greetings with him, and
when this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he too sat
down at one side. Ghatikara then said to the Blessed One
Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened: 'Venerable sir,
this is the brahmin student Jotipala, my friend, my close friend.
Let the Blessed One teach him the Dhamma.'

"Then the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully
enlightened, instructed, urged, roused, and encouraged
Ghatikara the potter and Jotipala the brahmin student with an
exposition of the Dhamma. At the conclusion of the exposition,
having delighted and rejoiced in the Blessed One Kassapa's
words, they rose from their seats, and after paying homage to
the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened,
keeping him on their right, they departed.

11. "Then Jotipala asked Ghatikara: 'Now that you have
heard this Dhamma, my dear Ghatikara, why don't you go


672 Ghatikara Sutta: Sutta 81


ii 50


forth from the home life into homelessness?' - 'My dear Jotipala,
don't you know that I support my blind and aged parents?' -
'Then, my dear Ghatikara, I shall go forth from the home life
into homelessness.'

12. "So Ghatikara the potter and Jotipala the brahmin student
went to the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully
enlightened. [49] After paying homage to him, they sat down at
one side and Ghatikara the potter said to the Blessed One
Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened: 'Venerable sir,
this is the brahmin student Jotipala, my friend, my close friend.
Let the Blessed One give him the going forth.' And the brahmin
student Jotipala received the going forth from the Blessed One
Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened, and he received
the full admission. 793

13. "Then not long after Jotipala the brahmin student had
received the full admission, a half-month after he had received
the full admission, the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and
fully enlightened, having stayed at Vebhalinga as long as he
chose, set out to wander towards Benares. Wandering by stages,
he eventually arrived at Benares, and there he went to live in the
Deer Park at Isipatana.

14. "Now King KikI of Kasi heard: 'It seems that the Blessed
One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened, has reached
Benares and is living in the Deer Park at Isipatana.' So he had a
number of state carriages made ready, and mounting a state car-
riage, drove out from Bepares with the full pomp of royalty in
order to see the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully
enlightened. He went thus as far as the road was passable for
carriages, and then he got down from his carriage and went for-
ward on foot to the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and
fully enlightened. After paying homage to him, he sat down at
one side and the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully
enlightened, instructed, urged, roused, and encouraged King
KikI of Kasi with an exposition of the Dhamma.

15. "At the conclusion of the exposition, King KikI of Kasi
said: [50] 'Venerable sir, let the Blessed One together with the
Sangha of bhikkhus consent to accept tomorrow's meal from
me.' And the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully
enlightened, accepted in silence. Then, knowing that the Blessed
One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened, had accepted.


Ghatlkara the Potter 673


ii 51


he rose from his seat and after paying homage to him, keeping
him on his right, he departed.

16. "Then, when the night had ended. King Kikl of Kasi had
good food of various kinds prepared in his own dwelling - red
rice stored in the sheaf with the dark grains picked out, along
with many sauces and curries - and he had the time announced
to the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlight-
ened, thus: 'It is time, venerable sir, the meal is ready/

17. "Then, it being morning, the Blessed One Kassapa, accom-
plished and fully enlightened, dressed, and taking his bowl and
outer robe, he went with the Sangha of bhikkhus to the dwelling
of King Kikl of Kasi and sat down on the seat made ready. Then,
with his own hands. King Kikl of Kasi served and satisfied the
Sangha of bhikkhus headed by the Buddha with the various
kinds of good food. When the Blessed One Kassapa, accom-
plished and fully enlightened, had eaten and had withdrawn his
hand from the bowl, King Kild of Kasi took a low seat, sat down
at one side and said: 'Venerable sir, let the Blessed One accept
from me a residence for the Rains in Benares; that will be helpful
for the Sangha.' - 'Enough, king, my residence for the Rains has
already been provided for.'

"A second and a third time King Kikl of Kasi said: 'Venerable
sir, let the Blessed One accept from me a residence for the Rains
in Benares; that will be helpful for the Sangha.' - 'Enough, king,
my residence for the Rains has already been provided for.'

"The king thought: 'The Blessed One Kassapa, [51] accom-
plished and fully enlightened, does not accept from me a resi-
dence for the Rains in Benares,' and he was very disappointed
and sad.

18. "Then he said: 'Venerable sir, have you a better supporter
than I am?' - 'I have, great king. There is a market town called
Vebhalinga where a potter named Ghatlkara lives. He is my
supporter, my chief supporter. Now you, great king, thought:
"The Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlightened,
does not accept from me a residence for the Rains in Benares,"
and you were very disappointed and sad; but the potter Ghatl-
kara is not and will not be so. The potter Ghatlkara has gone for
refuge to the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha. He
abstains from killing living beings, from taking what is not
given, from misconduct in sensual pleasures, from false speech.


674 Ghatikara Sutta: Sutta 81


ii 53


and from wine, liquor, and intoxicants, which are the basis of
negligence. He has perfect confidence in the Buddha, the
Dhamma, and the Sangha, and he possesses the virtues loved by
noble ones. He is free from doubt about suffering, about the ori-
gin of suffering, about the cessation of suffering, and about the
way leading to the cessation of suffering. He eats only in one
part of the day, he observes celibacy, he is virtuous, of good
character. He has laid aside gems and gold, he has given up
gold and silver. He does not dig the ground for clay using a pick
with his own hand; what is left over from embankments or
thrown up by rats, he brings home in a carrier; when he has
made a pot he says: "Let anyone who likes set down some
selected rice or selected beans or selected lentils, and let him
take away whatever he likes." 794 He supports his blind and aged
parents. [52] Having destroyed the five lower fetters, he is one
who will reappear spontaneously [in the Pure Abodes] and there
attain final Nibbana without ever returning from that world.

19. '"On one occasion when I was living at Vebhalinga, it
being morning, I dressed, and taking my bowl and outer robe, I
went to the potter Ghatlkara's parents and asked them: "Where
has the potter gone, please?" - "Venerable sir, your supporter
has gone out; but take rice from the cauldron and sauce from the
saucepan and eat."

"1 did so and went away. Then the potter Ghatikara went to
his parents and asked: "Who has taken rice from the cauldron
and sauce from the saucepan, eaten and gone away?" - "My
dear, the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlight-
ened, did."

"'Then the potter Ghatikara thought: "It is a gain for me, it is a
great gain for me that the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished
and fully enlightened, relies on me thus!" And rapture and hap-
piness never left him for a half-month or his parents for a week.

20. "'On another occasion when I was living at Vebhalinga, it
being morning, I dressed, and taking my bowl and outer robe, I
went to the potter Ghatlkara's parents and asked them: "Where
has the potter gone, please?" - "Venerable sir, your supporter
has gone out; but take some porridge from the vessel and sauce
from the saucepan and eat."

"'I did so [53] and went away. Then the potter Ghatikara
went to his parents and asked: "Who has taken porridge from



ii 54


Ghatikara the Potter 675


the vessel and sauce from the saucepan, eaten and gone away?"

- "My dear, the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully
enlightened, did."

"'Then the potter Ghatikara thought: "It is a gain for me, it is a
great gain for me that the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished
and fully enlightened, relies on me thus!" And rapture and hap-
piness never left him for a half-month or his parents for a week.

21. '"On another occasion when I was living at Vebhalinga my
hut leaked. Then I addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Go, bhikkhus,
and find out if there is any grass at the potter Ghatlkara's house."

- "Venerable sir, there is no grass at the potter Ghatlkara's
house; there is the grass thatch on his roof." - "Go, bhikkhus,
and remove the grass from the potter Ghatlkara's house."

"'They did so. Then the potter Ghatlkara's parents asked the
bhikkhus: "Who is removing the grass from the house?" -
"Sister, the hut of the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and
fully enlightened, is leaking." - "Take it, venerable sirs, take it
and bless you!"

"'Then the potter Ghatikara went to his parents and asked:
"Who has removed the grass from the roof?" - "The bhikkhus
did, my dear; the hut of the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished
and fully enlightened, is leaking."

"'Then the potter Ghatikara thought: "It is a gain for me, it is a
great gain for me that the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished
and fully enlightened, relies on me thus!" And [54] the rapture
and happiness never left him for a half-month or his parents for
a week. Then that house remained three whole months with the
sky for a roof, and yet no rain came in. Such is the potter
Ghatikara.'

"'It is a gain for the potter Ghatikara, it is a great gain for him
that the Blessed One Kassapa, accomplished and fully enlight-
ened, relies on him thus.'

22. "Then King KikI of Kasi dispatched to the potter Ghatikara
five hundred cartloads of red rice stored in the sheaf, and also
sauce materials to go with it. Then the king's men went to the
potter Ghatikara and told him: 'Venerable sir, there are five hun-
dred cartloads of red rice stored in the sheaf, and also sauce
materials to go with it, dispatched to you by King KikI of Kasi;
please accept them.' - 'The king is very busy and has much to
do. I have enough. Let this be for the king himself.' 795


676 Ghatikara Sutta: Sutta 81


ii 54


23. "Now, Ananda, you may think thus: 'Certainly, someone
else was the brahmin student Jotipala on that occasion.' But it
should not be regarded thus. I was the brahmin student Jotipala
on that occasion."

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Ananda was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


82 Ratthapala Sutta
On Ratthapala


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was
wandering in the Kuru country with a large Sangha of
bhikkhus, and eventually he arrived at a Kuru town named
Thullakotthita.

2. The brahmin householders of Thullakotthita heard: "The
recluse Gotama, the son of the Sakyans who went forth from a
Sakyan clan, has been wandering in the Kuru country [55] with
a large Sangha of bhikkhus and has come to Thullakotthita.
Now a good report of Master Gotama has been spread to this
effect: 'That Blessed One is accomplished, fully enlightened,
perfect in true knowledge and conduct, sublime, knower of
worlds, incomparable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of
gods and humans, enlightened, blessed. He declares this world
with its gods, its Maras, and its Brahmas, this generation with
its recluses and brahmins, its princes and its people, which he
has himself realised with direct knowledge. He teaches the
Dhamma good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good
in the end, with the right meaning and phrasing, and he reveals
a holy life that is utterly perfect and pure.' Now it is good to see
such arahants."

3. Then the brahmin householders of Thullakotthita went to
the Blessed One. Some paid homage to the Blessed One and sat
down at one side; some exchanged greetings with him, and
when this courteous and amiable talk was finished, sat down at
one side; some extended their hands in reverential salutation
towards the Blessed One and sat down at one side; some pro-
nounced their name and clan in the Blessed One's presence and
sat down at one side; some kept silent and sat down at one side.
When they were seated, the Blessed One instructed, urged,
roused, and encouraged them with talk on the Dhamma.


677


678 Ratthapala Sutta: Sutta 82


ii 56


4. Now at that time a clansman named Ratthapala, the son of
the leading clan in that same Thullakotthita, was sitting in the
assembly. Then it occurred to him: "As I understand the
Dhamma taught by the Blessed One, it is not easy while living in
a home to lead the holy life, utterly perfect and pure as a pol-
ished shell. Suppose I shave off my hair and beard, put on the
yellow robe, and go forth from the home life into homelessness."

5. Then the brahmin householders of Thullakotthita, having
been instructed, urged, roused, and encouraged by the Blessed
One with talk on the Dhamma, delighted and rejoiced in his
words. They then rose from their [56] seats, and after paying
homage to him, they departed, keeping him on their right.

6. Soon after they had gone, the clansman Ratthapala went to
the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down
at one side and said to the Blessed One: "Venerable sir, as I
understand the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One, it is not
easy while living in a home to lead the holy life, utterly perfect
and pure as a polished shell. Venerable sir, I wish to shave off
my hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from
the home life into homelessness. I would receive the going forth
under the Blessed One, I would receive the full admission."

"Have you been permitted by your parents, Ratthapala, to go
forth from the home life into homelessness?"

"No, venerable sir, I have not been permitted by my parents."

"Ratthapala, Tathagatas do not give the going forth to anyone
who does not have his parents' permission."

"Venerable sir, I shall see to it that my parents permit me to go
forth from the home life into homelessness."

7. Then the clansman Ratthapala rose from his seat, and after
paying homage to the Blessed One, he departed, keeping him on
his right. He went to his parents and told them: "Mother and
father, as I understand the Dhamma taught by the Blessed One,
it is not easy while living in a home to lead the holy life, utterly
perfect and pure as a polished shell. I wish to shave off my hair
and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from the home
life into homelessness. Give me permission to go forth from the
home life into homelessness."

When he had said this, his parents replied: "Dear Ratthapala,
you are our only son, dear and beloved. You have been raised
in comfort, brought up in comfort; you know nothing of suffer-


ii 59


On Ratthapala 679


ing, dear Ratthapala. [57] Even in case of your death we would
lose you unwillingly, so how could we give you our permission
to go forth from the home life into homelessness while you are
still living?"

For the second time... For the third time the clansman Rattha-
pala said to his parents: "Mother and father... give me permis-
sion to go forth from the home life into homelessness."

For the third time his parents replied: "Dear Ratthapala... how
could we give you our permission to go forth from the home life
into homelessness while you are still living?"

Then, not receiving his parents' permission to go forth, the
clansman Ratthapala lay down there on the bare floor, saying:
"Right here I shall either die or receive the going forth." [58]

8. Then the clansman Ratthapala's parents said to him: "Dear
Ratthapala, you are our only son, dear and beloved. You have
been raised in comfort, brought up in comfort; you know noth-
ing of suffering, dear Ratthapala. Get up, dear Ratthapala, eat,
drink, and amuse yourself. While eating, drinking, and amusing
yourself, you can be happy enjoying sensual pleasures and mak-
ing merit. We do not permit you to go forth from the home life
into homelessness. Even in the case of your death we would lose
you unwillingly, so how could we give you our permission to go
forth from the home life into homelessness while you are still liv-
ing?" When this was said, the clansman Ratthapala was silent.

For the second time... For the third time his parents said to him:
"Dear Ratthapala. . .how could we give you our permission to go
forth from the home life into homelessness while you are still
living?" For the third time the clansman Ratthapala was silent.

9. Then the clansman Ratthapala's parents went to his friends
and said to them: "Dears, the clansman Ratthapala has lain
down on the bare floor, having said: 'Right here I shall either die’
or receive the going forth.' Come, dears, go to the clansman
Ratthapala and say to him: 'Friend Ratthapala, you are your par-
ents' only son... Get up, friend Ratthapala, eat, drink, and amuse
yourself ... [59] how could your parents give you their permis-
sion to go forth from the home life into homelessness while you
are still living?"'

10. Then the clansman Ratthapala's friends went to him and
said: "Friend Ratthapala, you are your parents' only son, dear
and beloved. You have been raised in comfort, brought up in


680 Ratthapala Sutta: Sutta 82


ii 60


comfort; you know nothing of suffering, friend Ratthapala. Get
up, friend Ratthapala, eat, drink, and amuse yourself. While eat-
ing, drinking, and amusing yourself, you can be happy enjoying
sensual pleasures and making merit. Your parents do not permit
you to go forth from the home life into homelessness. Even in
case of your death they would lose you unwillingly, so how
could they give you their permission to go forth from the home
life into homelessness while you are still living?" When this was
said, the clansman Ratthapala was silent.

For the second time... For the third time his friends said to him:
"Friend Ratthapala. . .how could they give you their permission to
go forth from the home life into homelessness while you are still
living?" For the third time the clansman Ratthapala was silent.

11. Then the clansman Ratthapala's friends went to his parents
and said to them: "Mother and father, the clansman Ratthapala
is lying down there on the bare floor, having said: 'Right here I
shall either die or [60] get the going forth.' Now if you do not
give him your permission to go forth from the home life into
homelessness, he will die there. But if you give him your per-
mission, you will see him after he has gone forth. And if he does
not enjoy the going forth, what else can he do then but return
here? So give him your permission to go forth from the home
life into homelessness."

"Then, dears, we give the clansman Ratthapala permission to
go forth from the home life into homelessness. But when he has
gone forth, he must visit his parents."

Then the clansman Ratthapala's friends went to him and told
him: "Get up, friend Ratthapala. Your parents permit you to go
forth from the home life into homelessness. But when you have
gone forth, you must visit your parents."

12. The clansman Ratthapala then got up, and when he had
regained his strength, he went to the Blessed One, and after pay-
ing homage to him, he sat down at one side and told him:
"Venerable sir, I have my parents' permission to go forth from
the home life into homelessness. Let the Blessed One give me
the going forth." Then the clansman Ratthapala received the
going forth under the Blessed One, and he received the full
admission. 796

13. Then not long after the venerable Ratthapala had received
the full admission, a half-month after he had received the full


On Ratthapala 681


ii 62


admission, the Blessed One, having stayed at Thullakotthita as
long as he chose, set out to wander towards Savatthi. Wan-
dering by stages, he eventually arrived at Savatthi, and there
[61] he lived at Savatthi in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.

14. Before long, dwelling alone, withdrawn, diligent, ardent, and
resolute, the venerable Ratthapala, by realising for himself with
direct knowledge, here and now entered upon and abided in that
supreme goal of the holy life for the sake of which clansmen right-
ly go forth from the home life into homelessness. 797 He directly
knew: "Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to
be done has been done, there is no more coming to any state of
being." And the venerable Ratthapala became one of the arahants.

15. Then the venerable Ratthapala went to the Blessed One,
and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and
told him: "Venerable sir, I wish to visit my parents, if I have the
Blessed One's permission."

Then the Blessed One penetrated mentally the thoughts in
venerable Ratthapala's mind. When he knew that the clansman
Ratthapala was incapable of abandoning the training and
returning to the low life, he told him: "Now is the time,
Ratthapala, to do as you think fit."

16. Then the venerable Ratthapala rose from his seat, and after
paying homage to the Blessed One, he departed, keeping him on
his right. He then set his resting place in order, and taking his
bowl and outer robe, set out to wander towards Thullakotthita.
Wandering by stages, he eventually arrived at Thullakotthita.
There he lived in Thullakotthita in King Koravya's Migaclra
Garden. Then, when it was morning, he dressed, and taking his
bowl and outer robe, went into Thullakotthita for alms. As he
was wandering for alms from house to house in Thullakotthita,
he came to his own father's house.

17. Now on that occasion the venerable Ratthapala's father
was sitting in the hall of the central door having his hair
dressed. When he saw the venerable Ratthapala coming in the
distance, he said: "Our only son, dear and beloved, was made to
go forth by these bald-pated recluses." [62] Then at his own
father's house the venerable Ratthapala received neither alms
nor a polite refusal; instead, he received only abuse.

18. Just then a slavewoman belonging to one of his relatives
was about to throw away some old porridge. 798 Seeing this, the


682 Ratthapala Sutta: Sutta 82


ii 63


venerable Ratthapala said to her: "Sister, if that stuff is to be
thrown away, then pour it into my bowl here."

While she was doing so, she recognised the characteristic fea-
tures of his hands, his feet, and his voice. Then she went to his
mother and said: "Please know, my lady, that my lord's son
Ratthapala has arrived."

"Gracious! If what you say is true, you are no longer a slave!"

Then the venerable Ratthapala's mother went to his father and
said: "Please know, householder, they say that the clansman
Ratthapala has arrived."

19. Just then the venerable Ratthapala was eating the old por-
ridge by the wall of a certain shelter. His father went to him and
said: "Ratthapala, my dear, surely there is... and you will be eat-
ing old porridge! 799 Is there not your own house to go to?"

"How could we have a house, householder, when we have
gone forth from the home life into homelessness? We are home-
less, householder. We went [63] to your house, but we received
neither alms nor a polite refusal there; instead we received
only abuse."

"Come, dear Ratthapala, let us go to the house."

"Enough, householder, my meal for today is finished."

"Then, dear Ratthapala, consent to accept tomorrow's meal."
The venerable Ratthapala consented in silence.

20. Then, knowing that the venerable Ratthapala had consent-
ed, his father went back to his own house where he had gold
coins and bullion made into a large heap and covered it with
mats. Then he told the venerable Ratthapala's former wives:
"Come, daughters-in-law, adorn yourselves with ornaments in
the way Ratthapala found you most dear and loveable."

21. When night had ended, the venerable Ratthapala's father
had good food of various kinds prepared in his own house and
had the time announced to the venerable Ratthapala: "It is time,
dear Ratthapala, the meal is ready."

22. Then, it being morning, the venerable Ratthapala dressed,
and taking his bowl and outer robe, he went to his own father's
house and sat down on the seat made ready. Then his father had
the pile of gold coins and bullion uncovered and said: "Dear
Ratthapala, this is your maternal fortune; your paternal fortune
is another and your ancestral fortune is yet another. Dear
Ratthapala, you can enjoy the wealth and make merit. Come


ii 65


On Ratthapala 683


then, dear, [64] abandon the training and return to the low life,
enjoy the wealth and make merit."

"Householder, if you would follow my advice, then have this
pile of gold coins and bullion loaded on carts and carried away
to be dumped midstream in the river Ganges. Why is that?
Because, householder, on account of this there will arise for you
sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair."

23. Then the venerable Ratthapala's former wives clasped his
feet and said to him: "What are they like, my lord's son, the
nymphs for whose sake you lead the holy life?"

"We do not lead the holy life for the sake of nymphs, sisters."

"Our lord's son Ratthapala calls us 'sisters,'" they cried and
right there they fainted.

24. Then the venerable Ratthapala told his father: "Householder,
if there is a meal to be given, then give it. Do not harass us."

"Eat then, dear Ratthapala, the meal is ready."

Then, with his own hands, the venerable Ratthapala's father
served and satisfied him with the various kinds of good food.
When the venerable Ratthapala had eaten and had withdrawn
his hand from the bowl, he stood up and uttered these stanzas:

25. "Behold a puppet here pranked out, 800
A body built up out of sores.

Sick, an object for concern,

Where no stability abides.

Behold a figure here pranked out
With jewellery and earrings too,

A skeleton wrapped up in skin,

Made attractive by its clothes.

Its feet adorned with henna dye
And powder smeared upon its face:

It may beguile a fool, but not
A seeker of the further shore. [65]

Its hair is dressed in eightfold plaits
And unguent smeared upon its eyes:

It may beguile a fool, but not
A seeker of the further shore.


684 Ratthapala Sutta: Sutta 82


ii 66


A filthy body well adorned
Like a new-painted unguent pot:

It may beguile a fool, but not
A seeker of the further shore.

The deer-hunter set out the snare
But the deer did not spring the trap;

We ate the bait and now depart
Leaving the hunters to lament."

26. After the venerable Ratthapala had stood up and uttered
these stanzas, he went to King Koravya's Migacira garden and
sat down at the root of a tree for the day's abiding.

27. Then King Koravya addressed his gamekeeper thus: "Good
gamekeeper, tidy up the Migacira Garden so that we may go to
the pleasure garden to see a pleasing spot." - "Yes, sire," he
replied. Now while he was tidying up the Migacira Garden, the
gamekeeper saw the venerable Ratthapala seated at the root of a
tree for the day's abiding. When he saw him, he went to King
Koravya and told him: "Sire, the Migacira Garden has been tidied
up. The clansman Ratthapala is there, the son of the leading clan
in this same Thullakotthita, of whom you have always spoken
highly; 801 he is seated at the root of a tree for the day's abiding."

"Then, good Migava, enough of the pleasure garden for today.
Now we shall go to pay respects to that Master Ratthapala."

28. Then, saying: "Give away all the food that has been pre-
pared there," King Koravya had a number of state carriages pre-
pared, and mounting one of them, accompanied by the other
carriages, he drove out from Thullakotthita with the full pomp
of royalty to see the venerable Ratthapala. He drove thus as far
as the road was passable for carriages, and then he dismounted
from his carriage and went forward on foot with a following of
the most eminent officials to where the venerable Ratthapala
was. [66] He exchanged greetings with the venerable Rattha-
pala, and when this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he
stood at one side and said: "Here is an elephant rug. Let Master
Ratthapala be seated on it."

"There is no need, great king. Sit down. I am sitting on my
own mat."


On Ratthapala 685


ii 67


King Koravya sat down on a seat made ready and said:

29. "Master Ratthapala, there are four kinds of loss. Because
they have undergone these four kinds of loss, some people here
shave off their hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go
forth from the home life into homelessness. What are the four?
They are loss through ageing, loss through sickness, loss of
wealth, and loss of relatives.

30. "And what is loss through ageing? Here, Master Rattha-
pala, someone is old, aged, burdened with years, advanced in
life, come to the last stage. He considers thus: T am old, aged,
burdened with years, advanced in life, come to the last stage. It
is no longer easy for me to acquire unacquired wealth or to
augment wealth already acquired. Suppose I shave off my hair
and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from the home
life into homelessness.' Because he has undergone that loss
through ageing, he shaves off his hair and beard, puts on the
yellow robe, and goes forth from the home life into homeless-
ness. This is called loss through ageing. But Master Ratthapala
is now still young, a black-haired young man endowed with the
blessing of youth, in the prime of life. Master Ratthapala has
not undergone any loss through ageing. What has he known or
seen or heard that he has gone forth from the home life into
homelessness?

31. "And what is loss through sickness? Here, Master
Ratthapala, someone is afflicted, suffering, and gravely ill. He
considers thus: 'I am afflicted, suffering, and gravely ill. It is no
longer easy for me to acquire unacquired wealth... [67]... into
homelessness.' Because he has undergone that loss through sick-
ness... he goes forth from the home life into homelessness. This
is called loss through sickness. But Master Ratthapala now is
free from illness and affliction; he possesses a good digestion
that is neither too cool nor too warm but medium. Master
Ratthapala has not undergone any loss through sickness. What
has he known or seen or heard that he has gone forth from the
home life into homelessness?

32. "And what is loss of wealth? Here, Master Ratthapala,
someone is rich, of great wealth, of great possessions. Gradually
his wealth dwindles away. He considers thus: 'Formerly I was
rich, of great wealth, of great possessions. Gradually my
wealth has dwindled away. It is no longer easy for me to


686 Ratthapala Sutta: Sutta 82


ii 68


acquire unacquired wealth... into homelessness.' Because he has
undergone that loss of wealth. . .he goes forth from the home life
into homelessness. This is called loss of wealth. But Master
Ratthapala is the son of the leading clan in this same Thulla-
kotthita. Master Ratthapala has not undergone any loss of
wealth. What has he known or seen or heard that he has gone
forth from the home life into homelessness?

33. "And what is loss of relatives? Here, Master Ratthapala,
someone has many friends and companions, kinsmen and rela-
tives. Gradually those relatives of his dwindle away. He considers
thus: 'Formerly I had many friends and companions, kinsmen
and relatives. Gradually those relatives of mine have dwindled
away. It is no longer easy for me to acquire unacquired
wealth. . . [68] . . .into homelessness.' Because he has undergone that
loss of relatives... he goes forth from the home life into home-
lessness. This is called loss of relatives. But Master Ratthapala
has many friends and companions, kinsmen and relatives, in
this same Thullakotthita. Master Ratthapala has not undergone
any loss of relatives. What has he known or seen or heard that
he has gone forth from the home life into homelessness?

34. "Master Ratthapala, these are the four kinds of loss.
Because they have undergone these four kinds of loss, some
people here shave off their hair and beard, put on the yellow
robe, and go forth from the home life into homelessness. Master
Ratthapala has not undergone any of these. What has he known
or seen or heard that he has gone forth from the home life into
homelessness?"

35. "Great king, there are four summaries of the Dhamma that
have been taught by the Blessed One who knows and sees,
accomplished and fully enlightened. Knowing and seeing and
hearing them, I went forth from the home life into homelessness.
What are the four?

36. (1) "'[Life in] any world is unstable, it is swept away': 802

this is the first summary of the Dhamma taught by the Blessed
One who knows and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened.
Knowing and seeing and hearing this, I went forth from the
home life into homelessness. go3

(2) "'[Life in] any world has no shelter and no protector :
this is the second summary of the Dhamma taught by the
Blessed One who knows and sees...



ii 69


On Ratthapala 687


(3) "'[Life in] any world has nothing of its own; one has to
leave all and pass on': 804 this is the third summary of the
Dhamma taught by the Blessed One who knows and sees. . .

(4) '"[Life in] any world is incomplete, insatiate, the slave of
craving': 805 this is the fourth summary of the Dhamma taught by
the Blessed One who knows and sees. . .

37. "Great king, these are the four summaries of the Dhamma
that have been taught by the Blessed One who knows and sees,
accomplished and fully enlightened. [69] Knowing and seeing
and hearing them, I went forth from the home life into home-
lessness."

38. "Master Ratthapala said: '[Life in] any world is unstable, it
is swept away.' How should the meaning of that statement be
understood?"

"What do you think, great king? When you were twenty or
twenty-five years old, were you an expert rider of elephants, an
expert horseman, an expert charioteer, an expert archer, an expert
swordsman, strong in thighs and arms, sturdy, capable in battle?"

"When I was twenty or twenty-five years old. Master
Ratthapala, I was an expert rider of elephants... strong in thighs
and arms, sturdy, capable in battle. Sometimes I wonder if I had
supernormal power then. I do not see anyone who could equal
me in strength."

"What do you think, great king? Are you now as strong in
thighs and arms, as sturdy and as capable in battle?"

"No, Master Ratthapala. Now I am old, aged, burdened with
years, advanced in life, come to the last stage; my years have
turned eighty. Sometimes I mean to put my foot here and I put
my foot somewhere else."

"Great king, it was on account of this that the Blessed One
who knows and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened, said:
'[Life in] any world is unstable, it is swept away'; and when I
knew and saw and heard this, I went forth from the home life
into homelessness."

"It is wonderful, Master Ratthapala, it is marvellous how well
that has been expressed by the Blessed One who knows and
sees, accomplished and fully enlightened: '[Life in] any world is
unstable, it is swept away.' It is indeed so!

39. "Master Ratthapala, there exist in this court elephant
troops and cavalry and chariot troops and infantry, which will


688 Ratthapala Sutta: Sutta 82 ii 71


serve to subdue any threats to us. [70] Now Master Ratthapala
said: '[Life in] any world has no shelter and no protector.' How
should the meaning of that statement be understood?"

"What do you think, great king? Do you have any chronic
ailment?"

"I have a chronic wind ailment, Master Ratthapala. Sometimes
my friends and companions, kinsmen, and relatives, stand
around me, thinking: 'Now King Koravya is about to die, now
King Koravya is about to die!'"

"What do you think, great king? Can you command your
friends and companions, your kinsmen and relatives: 'Come,
my good friends and companions, my kinsmen and relatives.
All of you present share this painful feeling so that I may feel
less pain'? Or do you have to feel that pain yourself alone?"

"I cannot command my friends and companions, my kins-
men and relatives thus, Master Ratthapala. I have to feel that
pain alone."

"Great king, it was on account of this that the Blessed One
who knows and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened, said:
'[Life in] any world has no shelter and no protector'; and when I
knew and saw and heard this, 1 went forth from the home life
into homelessness."

"It is wonderful, Master Ratthapala, it is marvellous how well
that has been expressed by the Blessed One who knows and
sees, accomplished and fully enlightened: '[Life in] any world
has no shelter and no protector.' It is indeed so!

40. "Master Ratthapala, there exist in this court abundant gold
coins and bullion stored away in vaults and depositories. Now
Master Ratthapala said: '[Life in] any world has nothing of its
own; one has to leave all and pass on.' How should the meaning
of that statement be understood?"

"What do you think, great king? You now [71] enjoy yourself
provided and endowed with the five cords of sensual pleasure,
but will you be able to have it of the life to come: 'Let me like-
wise enjoy myself provided and endowed with these same five
cords of sensual pleasure'? Or will others take over this property,
while you will have to pass on according to your actions?"

"I cannot have it thus of the life to come, Master Ratthapala-
On the contrary, others will take over this property while I shall
have to pass on according to my actions."


ii 72


On Ratthapala 689


"Great king, it was on account of this that the Blessed One
who knows and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened, said:
'[Life in] any world has nothing of its own; one has to leave all
and pass on'; and when I knew and saw and heard this, I went
forth from the home life into homelessness."

"It is wonderful, Master Ratthapala, it is marvellous how well
that has been expressed by the Blessed One who knows and
sees, accomplished and fully enlightened: '[Life in] any world
has nothing of its own; one has to leave all and pass on.' It is
indeed so!

41. "Now Master Ratthapala said: '[Life in] any world is
incomplete, insatiate, the slave of craving.' How should the
meaning of that statement be understood?"

"What do you think, great king? Do you reign over the rich
Kuru country?"

"Yes, Master Ratthapala, I do."

"What do you think, great king? Suppose a trustworthy and
reliable man came to you from the east and said: 'Please know,
great king, that I have come from the east, and there I saw a
large country, powerful and rich, very populous and crowded
with people. There are plenty of elephant troops there, plenty of
cavalry, chariot troops and infantry; there is plenty of ivory
there, and plenty of gold coins and bullion both unworked and
worked, and plenty of women for wives. With your present
forces you can conquer it. Conquer it then, great king.' What
would you do?" [72]

"We would conquer it and reign over it. Master Ratthapala."

"What do you think, great king? Suppose a trustworthy and
reliable man came to you from the west... from the north... from
the south and said: 'Please know, great king, that I have come
from the south, and there I saw a large country, powerful and
rich... Conquer it then, great king.' What would you do?"

"We would conquer it too and reign over it. Master Ratthapala."

"Great king, it was on account of this that the Blessed One
who knows and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened, said:
'[Life in] any world is incomplete, insatiate, the slave of craving';
and when I knew and saw and heard this, I went forth from the
home life into homelessness."

"It is wonderful. Master Ratthapala, it is marvellous how well
that has been expressed by the Blessed One who knows and


690 Ratthapala Sutta: Sutta 82


ii 73


sees, accomplished and fully enlightened: '[Life in] any world is
incomplete, insatiate, the slave of craving.' It is indeed so!"

42. That is what the venerable Ratthapala said. And having
said that he said further:

"I see men wealthy in the world, who yet
From ignorance give not their gathered wealth.

Greedily they hoard away their riches
Longing still for further sensual pleasures.

A king who has conquered the earth by force
And rules over the land the ocean bounds
Is yet unsated with the sea's near shore
And hungers for its further shore as well. [73]

Most other people too, not just a king,

Encounter death with craving unabated;

[With plans] still incomplete they leave the corpse;

Desires remain unsated in the world. r

His relatives lament and rend their hair.

Crying, 'Ah me! Alas! Our love is dead!'

They bear away the body wrapped in shrouds
To place it on a pyre and bum it there.

Clad in a shroud, he leaves his wealth behind.

Prodded with stakes he bums [upon the pyre].

And as he dies, no relatives or friends
Can offer him shelter and refuge here.

While his heirs take over his wealth, this being
Must pass on according to his actions;

And as he dies nothing can follow him;

Not child nor wife nor wealth nor royal estate.

Longevity is not acquired with wealth
Nor can prosperity banish old age;

Short is this life, as all the sages say.

Eternity it knows not, only change.


ii 74


On Ratthapala 691


The rich and poor alike shall feel [Death's] touch.
The fool and sage as well shall feel it too;

But while the fool lies stricken by his folly.

No sage will ever tremble at the touch.

Better is wisdom here than any wealth.

Since by wisdom one gains the final goal.

For people through ignorance do evil deeds
While failing to reach the goal from life to life.

As one goes to the womb and the next world.
Renewing the successive round of births.
Another of little wisdom, trusting him.

Goes also to the womb and the next world. [74]

Just as a robber caught in burglary
Is made to suffer for his evil deed.

So people after death, in the next world,

Are made to suffer for their evil deeds.

Sensual pleasures, varied, sweet, delightful.

In many different ways disturb the mind:

Seeing the danger in these sensual ties
I chose to lead the homeless life, O King.

As fruits fall from the tree, so people too.

Both young and old, fall when this body breaks.
Seeing this too, O King, I have gone forth:

Better is the recluse's life assured."


83 Makhadeva Sutta
King Makhadeva


1. Thus have I heard . 806 On one occasion, the Blessed One was
living at Mithila in the Makhadeva Mango Grove. 807

2. Then in a certain place the Blessed One smiled. It occurred
to the venerable Ananda: "What is the reason, what is the cause,
for the Blessed One's smile? Tathagatas do not smile for no rea-
son." So he arranged his upper robe on one shoulder, and
extending his hands in reverential salutation towards the
Blessed One, he asked him: "Venerable sir, what is the reason,
what is the cause, for the Blessed One's smile? Tathagatas do not
smile for no reason."

3. "Once, Ananda, in this same Mithila there was a king
named Makhadeva. He was a righteous king who ruled by the
Dhamma, a great king who was established in the Dhamma. 808
He conducted himself by the Dhamma among brahmins and
householders, among town-dwellers and countryfolk, and he
observed the Uposatha days [75] on the fourteenth, fifteenth,
and eighth of the fortnight. 809

4. "Now at the end of many years, many hundred years, many
thousand years. King Makhadeva addressed his barber thus:
'Good barber, when you see any grey hairs growing on my
head, then tell me.' - 'Yes, sire,' he replied. And after many
years, many hundred years, many thousand years, the barber
saw grey hairs growing on King Makhadeva's head. 810 When he
saw them, he said to the king: 'The divine messengers have
appeared, sire; grey hairs are to be seen growing on your
majesty's head.' - 'Then, good barber, pull out those grey hairs
carefully with tweezers and put them in my palm.' - 'Yes, sire,
he replied, and he pulled out those grey hairs carefully with
tweezers and put them in the king's palm.


692


King Makhadeva 693


ii 76


"Then King Makhadeva gave the best township to his barber,
and calling the prince, his eldest son, he said: 'Dear prince, the
divine messengers have appeared; 811 grey hairs are seen growing
on my head. I have enjoyed human sensual pleasures; now it is
time to seek divine sensual pleasures. Come, dear prince, take
over the kingship. I shall shave off my hair and beard, put on the
yellow robe, and go forth from the home life into homelessness.
And now, dear prince, when you too see grey hairs growing on
your head, then after giving the best township to your barber,
and after carefully instructing the prince, your eldest son, in
kingship, shave off your hair and beard, put on the yellow robe,
and go forth from the home life into homelessness. Continue this
good practice instituted by me and do not be the last man. Dear
prince, when there are two men living, he under whom there
occurs a breach of this good practice - he is the last man among
them. Therefore, dear prince, I say to you: Continue this good
practice [76] instituted by me and do not be the last man.'

5. "Then, after giving the best township to his barber and after
carefully instructing the prince, his eldest son, in kingship, in
the Makhadeva Mango Grove he shaved off his hair and beard,
put on the yellow robe, and went forth from the home life into
homelessness.

"He abided pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with
loving-kindness, likewise the second, likewise the third, like-
wise the fourth; so above, below, around, and everywhere, and
to all as to himself, he abided pervading the all-encompassing
world with a mind imbued with loving-kindness, abundant,
exalted, immeasurable, without hostility and without ill will.

"He abided pervading one quarter with a mind imbued with
compassion... with a mind imbued with appreciative joy... with
a mind imbued with equanimity, likewise the second, likewise'
the third, likewise the fourth; so above, below, around, and
everywhere, and to all as to himself, he abided pervading the
all-encompassing world with a mind imbued with equanimity,
abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without hostility and with-
out ill will.

6. "For eighty-four thousand years King Makhadeva played
childish games; for eighty-four thousand years he acted as vice-
regent; for eighty-four thousand years he governed the kingdom;



694 Makhadeva Sutta: Sutta 83


ii 79


for eighty-four thousand years he led the holy life in this
Makhadeva Mango Grove after shaving off his hair and beard,
putting on the yellow robe, and going forth from the home life
into homelessness. By developing the four divine abodes, on
the dissolution of the body, after death, he passed on to the
Brahma- world.

7-9. "Now at the end of many years, many hundred years,
many thousand years. King Makhadeva's son addressed his bar-
ber thus:... (as above, §§4-6, reading "King Makhadeva's son"
throughout)... [77, 78]... By developing the four divine abodes, on
the dissolution of the body, after death, he passed on to the
Brahma- world.

10. "The descendants of King Makhadeva's son to the number
of eighty-four thousand kings in succession, after shaving off
their hair and beard and putting on the yellow robe, went forth
from the home life into homelessness in this Makhadeva Mango
Grove. They abided pervading one quarter with a mind imbued
with loving-kindness... with compassion... with appreciative
joy. . .with equanimity. . .without ill will.

11. "For eighty-four thousand years they played childish
games; for eighty-four thousand years they acted as vice-
regents; for eighty-four thousand years they governed the king-
dom; for eighty-four thousand years they led the holy life in this
Makhadeva Mango Grove after shaving off their hair and beard,
putting on the yellow robe, and going forth from the home life
into homelessness. By developing the four divine abodes, on the
dissolution of the body, after death, they passed on to the
Brahma-world.

12. "Nimi was the last of those kings. He was a righteous king
who ruled by the Dhamma, a great king who was established in
the Dhamma. He conducted himself by the Dhamma among
brahmins and householders, among town-dwellers and country-
folk, and he observed the Uposatha days on the fourteenth, fif-
teenth, and eighth of the fortnight.

13. "Once, Ananda, when the gods of the Thirty-three [79] had
met together and were seated in the Sudhamma Assembly, this
discussion arose among them: 'It is a gain, sirs, for the people of
Videha, it is a great gain for the people of Videha that their King
Nimi is a righteous king who rules by the Dhamma, a great king
who is established in the Dhamma. He conducts himself by the


ii 80


King Makhadeva 695


Dhamma among brahmins and householders, among town-
dwellers and countryfolk, and he observes the Uposatha days
on the fourteenth, fifteenth, and eighth of the fortnight/

"Then Sakka, ruler of gods, addressed the gods of the Thirty-
three: 'Good sirs, do you want to see King Nimi?' - 'Good sir,
we want to see King Nimi.'

"Now on that occasion, it being the Uposatha day of the fif-
teenth, King Nimi had washed his head and ascended to the
upper palace chamber, where he was seated for the Uposatha
observance. Then, just as quickly as a strong man might extend
his flexed arm or flex his extended arm, Sakka, ruler of gods,
vanished among the gods of the Thirty-three and appeared in
the presence of King Nimi. He said: 'It is a gain for you, great
king, it is a great gain for you, great king. When the gods of the
Thirty-three had met together and were seated in the Su-
dhamma Assembly, this discussion arose among them: "It is a
gain, sirs, for the people of Videha... eighth of the fortnight."
Great king, the gods want to see you. I shall send a chariot har-
nessed to a thousand thoroughbreds for you, great king. Great
king, mount the divine chariot without misgiving.'

"King Nimi consented in silence. Then, just as quickly as a
strong man might extend his flexed arm or flex his extended
arm, Sakka, ruler of gods, vanished in the presence of King
Nimi and appeared among the gods of the Thirty-three.

14. "Then Sakka, ruler of gods, addressed the charioteer
Matali thus: 'Come, good Matali, prepare a chariot harnessed to
a thousand thoroughbreds, and go to King Nimi and say: "Great
king, this chariot harnessed to a thousand thoroughbreds has
been sent for you by Sakka, ruler of gods. Great king, mount the
divine [80] chariot without misgiving/"

"'May your words be held sacred,' the charioteer Matali
replied. And having prepared a chariot harnessed to a thou-
sand thoroughbreds, he went to King Nimi and said: 'Great
king, this chariot harnessed to a thousand thoroughbreds has
been sent for you by Sakka, ruler of gods. Great king, mount
the divine chariot without misgiving. But, great king, by which
route shall I drive you: by that on which doers of evil experi-
ence the results of evil actions, or by that on which doers of
good experience the results of good actions?' - 'Drive me by
both routes, Matali.' 812



696 Makhadeva Sutta: Sutta 83


ii 82


15. "Matali brought King Nimi to the Sudhamxna Assembly.
Sakka, ruler of gods, saw King Nimi coming in the distance and
said to him: 'Come, great king! Welcome, great king! The gods
of the Thirty- three, great king, seated in the Sudhamma
Assembly, have expressed themselves thus: "It is a gain, sirs, for
the people of Videha... eighth of the fortnight." Great king, the
gods of the Thirty-three want to see you. Great king, enjoy
divine might among the gods.'

"'Enough, good sir. Let the charioteer drive me back to
Mithila. There I will conduct myself by the Dhamma among
brahmins and householders, among town-dwellers and country-
folk; there I will observe the Uposatha days on the fourteenth,
fifteenth, and eighth of the fortnight.'

16. "Then Sakka, ruler of gods, told the charioteer Matali:
'Come, good Matali, prepare the chariot harnessed to a thou-
sand thoroughbreds and drive King Nimi back to Mithila.'

"'May your word be held sacred,' the charioteer Matali
replied. And having prepared the chariot harnessed to a thou-
sand thoroughbreds, he drove King Nimi back to Mithila. And
there, indeed, King Nimi conducted himself by the Dhamma
among brahmins and householders, among town-dwellers and
countryfolk; and there [81] he observed the Uposatha days on
the fourteenth, fifteenth, and eighth of the fortnight.

17-19. "Then at the end of many years, many hundred years,
many thousand years. King Nimi addressed his barber thus:
...(as above, §§4-6, reading "King Nimi" throughout ) ... [82] ... By
developing the four divine abodes, on the dissolution of the
body, after death, he passed on to the Brahma-world.

20. "Now King Nimi had a son named Kalarajanaka. He did
not go forth from the home life into homelessness. He broke that
good practice. He was the last man among them.

21. "Now, Ananda, it may be that you think thus: 'Certainly,
someone else was King Makhadeva on that occasion.' But it
should not be regarded thus. I was King Makhadeva on that
occasion. I instituted that good practice and later generations
continued that good practice instituted by me. But that kind of
good practice does not lead to disenchantment, to dispassion, to
cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to
Nibbana, but only to reappearance in the Brahma-world. But
there is this kind of good practice that has been instituted by me


ii 83


King Makhadeva 697


now, which leads to complete disenchantment, to dispassion, to
cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to
Nibbana. And what is that good practice? It is this Noble
Eightfold Path; that is, right view, right intention, right speech,
right action, right livelihood, [83] right effort, right mindfulness,
and right concentration. This is the good practice instituted by
me now, which leads to complete disenchantment, to dispas-
sion, to cessation, to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlighten-
ment, to Nibbana.

"Ananda, I say to you: continue this good practice instituted
by me and do not be the last man. Ananda, when there are two
men living, he under whom there occurs a breach of this good
practice - he is the last man among them. Therefore, Ananda, I
say to you: continue this good practice instituted by me and do
not be the last man." 813

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Ananda was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


84 Madhura Sutta
At Madhura


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the venerable Maha
Kaccana was living at Madhura in the Gunda Grove. 814

2. King Avantiputta of Madhura heard: "The recluse Kaccana
is living at Madhura in the Gunda Grove. Now a good report of
Master Kaccana has been spread to this effect: 'He is wise, dis-
cerning, sagacious, learned, articulate, and perspicacious; he is
aged and he is an arahant. It is good to see such arahants.'"

3. Then King Avantiputta of Madhura had a number of state
carriages made ready, and mounting a state carriage, he drove
out from Madhura with the full pomp of royalty in order to see
the venerable Maha Kaccana. He went thus as far as the road
was passable for carriages, and then he got down from his car-
riage and went forward on foot to the venerable Maha
Kaccana. [84] He exchanged greetings with him, and when this
courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one
side and said:

4. "Master Kaccana, the brahmins say thus: 'Brahmins are the
highest caste, those of any other caste are inferior; brahmins are
the fairest caste, those of any other caste are dark; only brahmins
are purified, not non-brahmins; brahmins alone are the sons of
Brahma, the offspring of Brahma, born of his mouth, born of
Brahma, created by Brahma, heirs of Brahma.' What does
Master Kaccana say about that?"

5. "It is just a saying in the world, great king, that 'Brahmins
are the highest caste... heirs of Brahma.' And there is a way
whereby it can be understood how that statement of the brah-
mins is just a saying in the world.

"What do you think, great king? If a noble prospers in wealth,
grain, silver, or gold, will there be nobles who rise before him
and retire after him, who are eager to serve him, who seek to


698


ii 86 .


At Madhura 699


please him and speak sweetly to him, and will there also be
brahmins, merchants, and workers who do likewise?"

"There will be. Master Kaccana."

"What do you think, great king? If a brahmin prospers in
wealth, grain, silver, or gold, will there be brahmins who rise
before him and retire after him, who are eager to serve him, who
seek to please him and speak sweetly to him, and will there also
be merchants, workers, and nobles [85] who do likewise?"

"There will be. Master Kaccana."

"What do you think, great king? If a merchant prospers in
wealth, grain, silver, or gold, will there be merchants who rise
before him and retire after him, who are eager to serve him, who
seek to please him and speak sweetly to him, and will there also
be workers, nobles, and brahmins who do likewise?"

"There will be. Master Kaccana."

"What do you think, great king? If a worker prospers in
wealth, grain, silver, or gold, will there be workers who rise
before him and retire after him, who are eager to serve him, who
seek to please him and speak sweetly to him, and will there also
be nobles, brahmins, and merchants who do likewise?" 815

"There will be. Master Kaccana."

"What do you think, great king? If that is so, then are these
four castes all the same, or are they not, or how does it appear to
you in this case?" [86]

"Surely if that is so. Master Kaccana, then these four castes are
all the same: there is no difference between them at all that I see."

"That is a way, great king, whereby it can be understood how
that statement of the brahmins is just a saying in the world.

6. "What do you think, great king? Suppose a noble were to
kill living beings, take what is not given, misconduct himself in
sensual pleasures, speak falsely, speak maliciously, speak
harshly, gossip, be covetous, have a mind of ill will, and hold
wrong view. On the dissolution of the body, after death, would
he [be likely to] reappear in a state of deprivation, in an unhap-
py destination, in perdition, even in hell, or not, or how does it
appear to you in this case?"

"If a noble were such. Master Kaccana, he would [be likely to]
reappear in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in
perdition, even in hell. That is how it appears to me in this case,
and thus I have heard from the arahants."


700 Madhura Sutta: Sutta 84


ii 87


"What do you think, great king? Suppose a brahmin... a mer-
chant... a worker were to kill living beings... and hold wrong
view. On the dissolution of the body, after death, would he [be
likely to] reappear in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy desti-
nation, in perdition, even in hell, or not, or how does it appear
to you in this case?"

"If a brahmin... a merchant... a worker were such. Master
Kaccana, he would [be likely to] reappear in a state of depriva-
tion, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell. That
is how it appears to me in this case, and thus I have heard from
the arahants."

"What do you think, great king? If that is so, then are these
four castes all the same, or are they not, or how does it appear to
you in this case?" [87]

"Surely if that is so. Master Kaccana, then these four castes are
all the same: there is no difference between them at all that I see."

"That is also a way, great king, whereby it can be understood
how that statement of the brahmins is just a saying in the world.

7. "What do you think, great king? Suppose a noble were to
abstain from killing living beings, from taking what is not given,
from misconduct in sensual pleasures, from false speech, from
malicious speech, from harsh speech, and from gossip, and were
to be uncovetous, to have a mind without ill will, and to hold
right view. On the dissolution of the body, after death, would he
[be likely to] reappear in a happy destination, even in the heav-
enly world, or not, or hpw does it appear to you in this case?"

"If a noble were such. Master Kaccana, he would [be likely to]
reappear in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.
That is how it appears to me in this case, and thus I have heard
from the arahants."

"What do you think, great king? Suppose a brahmin... a mer-
chant... a worker were to abstain from killing living beings...
and to hold right view. On the dissolution of the body, after
death, would he [be likely to] reappear in a happy destination,
even in the heavenly world, or not, or how does it appear to
you in this case?"

"If a brahmin... a merchant... a worker were such. Master
Kaccana, he would [be likely to] reappear in a happy destina-
tion, even in the heavenly world. That is how it appears to me in
this case, and thus I have heard from the arahants."


ii 89


At Madhura 701


"What do you think, great king? If that is so, then are these
four castes all the same, or are they not, or how does it appear to
you in this case?" [88]

"Surely if that is so. Master Kaccana, then these four castes are
all the same: there is no difference between them at all that I see."

"That is also a way, great king, whereby it can be understood
how that statement of the brahmins is just a saying in the world.

8. "What do you think, great king? Suppose a noble were to
break into houses, plunder wealth, commit burglary, ambush
highways, or seduce another's wife, and if your men arrested him
and produced him, saying: 'Sire, this is the culprit; command
what punishment for him you wish,' how would you treat him?"

"We would have him executed, Master Kaccana, or we would
have him fined, or we would have him exiled, or we would do
with him as he deserved. Why is that? Because he has lost his
former status of a noble, and is simply reckoned as a robber."

"What do you think, great king? Suppose a brahmin... a mer-
chant... a worker were to break into houses... or seduce another's
wife, and if your men arrested him and produced him, saying:
'Sire, this is the culprit; command what punishment for him you
wish,' how would you treat him?"

"We would have him executed. Master Kaccana, or we would
have him fined, or we would have him exiled, or we would do
with him as he deserved. Why is that? Because he has lost his
former status of a brahmin... a merchant... a worker, and is sim-
ply reckoned as a robber."

"What do you think, great king? If that is so, then are these
four castes all the same, or are they not, or how does it appear to
you in this case?"

"Surely if that is so. Master Kaccana, then these four castes are
all the same; there is no difference between them at all that I see!"

"That is also a way, great king, whereby it can be understood how
that statement of the brahmins is just a saying in the world. [89]

9. "What do you think, great king? Suppose a noble, having
shaved off his hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and gone
forth from the home life into homelessness, were to abstain from
killing living beings, from taking what is not given, and from
false speech. Refraining from eating at night, he would eat only
in one part of the day, and would be celibate, virtuous, of good
character. How Would you treat him?"


702 Madhura Sutta: Sutta 84


ii 90


"We would pay homage to him. Master Kaccana, or we would
rise up for him, or invite him to be seated; or we would invite
him to accept robes, almsfood, resting place, and medicinal req-
uisites; or we would arrange for him lawful guarding, defence,
and protection. Why is that? Because he has lost his former sta-
tus of a noble, and is simply reckoned as a recluse."

"What do you think, great king? Suppose a brahmin... a mer-
chant... a worker, having shaved off his hair and beard... and
would be celibate, virtuous, of good character. How would you
treat him?"

"We would pay homage to him. Master Kaccana, or rise up
for him, or invite him to be seated; or we would invite him to
accept robes, almsfood, resting place, and medicinal requisites;
or we would arrange for him lawful guarding, defence, and
protection. Why is that? Because he has lost his former status
of a brahmin... a merchant... a worker, and is simply reckoned
as a recluse."

"What do you think, great king? If that is so, then are these
four castes all the same, or are they not, or how does it appear to
you in this case?"

"Surely if that is so. Master Kaccana, then these four castes are
all the same; there is no difference between them at all that I see."

"That is also a way, great king, whereby it can be under-
stood how that statement of the brahmins is just a saying in
the world." [90]

10. When this was said. King Avantiputta of Madhura said to
the venerable Maha Kaccana: "Magnificent, Master Kaccana!
Magnificent, Master Kaccana! Master Kaccana has made the
Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning
upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden,
showing the way to one who is lost, or holding up a lamp in the
dark for those with eyesight to see forms. I go to Master Kaccana
for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
From today let Master Kaccana remember me as a lay follower
who has gone to him for refuge for life."

"Do not go to me for refuge, great king. Go for refuge to that
same Blessed One to whom I have gone for refuge."

"Where is he living now, that Blessed One, accomplished and
fully enlightened, Master Kaccana?"


ii 90


At Madhura 703


"That Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened, has
attained to final Nibbana, great king."

11. "If we heard that that Blessed One was within ten leagues,
we would go ten leagues in order to see that Blessed One,
accomplished and fully enlightened. If we heard that that
Blessed One was within twenty leagues... thirty leagues... forty
leagues... fifty leagues. ..a hundred leagues, we would go a hun-
dred leagues in order to see that Blessed One, accomplished and
fully enlightened. But since that Blessed One has attained to
final Nibbana, we go to that Blessed One for refuge and to the
Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus. From today let Master
Kaccana remember me as a lay follower who has gone for refuge
for life."


85 Bodhirajakumara Sutta
To Prince Bodhi


[91] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was
living in the Bhagga country at Sumsumaragira in the Bhesakala
Grove, the Deer Park.

2. Now on that occasion a palace named Kokanada had recent-
ly been built for Prince Bodhi, and it had not yet been inhabited
by any recluse or brahmin or any human being at all. 816

3. Then Prince Bodhi addressed the brahmin student
Sanjikaputta thus: "Come, my dear Sanjikaputta, go to the
Blessed One and pay homage in my name with your head at his
feet, and ask whether he is free from illness and affliction and is
healthy, strong, and abiding in comfort, saying: 'Venerable sir.
Prince Bodhi pays homage with his head at the Blessed One's
feet, and he asks whether the Blessed One is free from
illness... and abiding in comfort.' Then say this: 'Venerable sir,
let the Blessed One together with the Sangha-of bhikkhus con-
sent to accept tomorrow'-s meal from Prince Bodhi.'"

"Yes, sir," Sanjikaputta replied, and he went to the Blessed
One and exchanged greetings with him. When this courteous
and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and said:
"Master Gotama, Prince Bodhi pays homage with his head at
Master Gotama's feet and asks whether he is free from
illness... and abiding in comfort. And he says this: 'Let Master
Gotama together with the Sangha of bhikkhus consent to accept
tomorrow's meal from Prince Bodhi.'"

4. The Blessed One consented in silence. Then, knowing that
the Blessed One had consented, Sanjikaputta rose from his seat,
went to Prince Bodhi, and told him what had happened [92],
adding: "The recluse Gotama has consented."

5. Then, when the night had ended, Prince Bodhi had good
food of various kinds prepared in his own residence, and he had


704


ii 93


To Prince Bodhi 705


the Kokanada Palace spread with white cloth down to the last
step of the staircase. Then he addressed the brahmin student
Sanjikaputta thus: "Come, my dear Sanjikaputta, go to the
Blessed One and announce that it is time thus: 'It is time, vener-
able sir, the meal is ready/"

"Yes, sir," Sanjikaputta replied, and he went to the Blessed
One and announced that it was time thus: "It is time. Master
Gotama, the meal is ready."

6. Then, it being morning, the Blessed One dressed, and taking
his bowl and outer robe, went to Prince Bodhi's residence.

7. Now on that occasion Prince Bodhi was standing in the
outer porch waiting for the Blessed One. When he saw the
Blessed One coming in the distance, he went out to meet him
and paid homage to him; and then, allowing the Blessed One to
precede him, he proceeded to the Kokanada Palace. But the
Blessed One stopped at the lowest step of the staircase. Prince
Bodhi said to him: "Venerable sir, let the Blessed One step on
the cloth, let the Sublime One step on the cloth, that it may lead
to my welfare and happiness for a long time." When this was
said, the Blessed One was silent. 817

A second time... A third time Prince Bodhi said to him:
"Venerable sir, let the Blessed One step on the cloth, let the
Sublime One step on the cloth, that it may lead to my welfare
and happiness for a long time."

The Blessed One looked at the venerable Ananda. [93] The
venerable Ananda said to Prince Bodhi: "Prince, let the cloth be
removed. The Blessed One will not step on a strip of cloth; the
Tathagata has regard for future generations." 818

8. So Prince Bodhi had the cloth removed, and he had seats
prepared in the upper apartments of the Kokanada Palace. The
Blessed One and the Sangha of bhikkhus ascended the Kokanada
Palace and sat down on the seats that had been prepared.

9. Then, with his own hands, Prince Bodhi served and satis-
fied the Sangha of bhikkhus headed by the Buddha with the
various kinds of good food. When the Blessed One had eaten
and had withdrawn his hand from the bowl. Prince Bodhi took a
low seat, sat down at one side, and said to the Blessed One:
"Venerable sir, we have thought thus: 'Pleasure is not to be
gained through pleasure; pleasure is to be gained through



706 Bodhirajakumara Sutta: Sutta 85


ii 94


10. "Prince, before my enlightenment, while I was still only
an unenlightened Bodhisatta, I too thought thus: 'Pleasure is
not to be gained through pleasure; pleasure is to be gained
through pain.'

11-14. "Later, prince, while still young, a black-haired young
man endowed with the blessing of youth, in the prime of life...
(as Sutta 26, §§15-17)... And I sat down there thinking: 'This will
serve for striving.'

15-42. "Now three similes occurred to me spontaneously,
never heard before... (as Sutta 36, §§17—44, but in the present sutta
in §§18-23 - corresponding to §§20-25 of Sutta 36 - the sentence
"But such painful feeling that arose in me did not invade my
mind and remain" does not occur; and in the present sutta in §§37,
39 and 42 - corresponding to §§39, 41, and 44 of Sutta 36 - the sen-
tence "But such pleasant feeling that arose in me did not invade
my mind and remain" does not occur)... as happens in one who
abides diligent, ardent, and resolute.

43-53. "I considered: "This Dhamma that I have attained is pro-
found'...^ Sutta 26, §§19-29) [94]... and the six of us lived on
what those two bhikkhus brought back from their almsround.

54. "Then the bhikkhus of the group of five, not long after
being thus taught and instructed by me, by realising for them-
selves with direct knowledge, here and now entered upon and
abided in that supreme goal of the holy life for the sake of which
clansmen rightly go forth from the home life into homelessness."

55. When this was sdid. Prince Bodhi said to the Blessed One:
"Venerable sir, when a bhikkhu finds the Tathagata to discipline
him, how long is it until by realising for himself with direct
knowledge, he here and now enters upon and abides in that
supreme goal of the holy life for the sake of which clansmen
rightly go forth from the home life into homelessness?"

"As to that, prince, I shall ask you a question in return.
Answer it as you choose. What do you think, prince? Are you
skilled in the art of wielding a goad while riding an elephant?"

"Yes, venerable sir, I am."

56. "What do you think, prince? Suppose a man came here
thinking: 'Prince Bodhi knows the art of wielding a goad while
riding an elephant; I shall train in that art under him.' If he had
no faith, he could not achieve what can be achieved by one who
has faith; if he had much illness, he could not achieve what can


ii 95


To Prince Bodhi 707


be achieved by one who is free from illness; if he was fraudulent
and deceitful, he could not achieve what can be achieved by one
who is honest and sincere; if he was lazy, he could not achieve
what can be achieved by one who is energetic; if he was not
wise, he could not achieve what can be achieved by one who is
wise. What do you think, prince? Could that man train under
you in the art of wielding a goad while riding an elephant?"

"Venerable sir, even if he had one of those deficiencies, he
could not train under me, so what of the five?"

57. "What do you think, prince? Suppose a man came here
thinking: [95] 'Prince Bodhi knows the art of wielding a goad
while riding an elephant; I shall train in that art under him.' If
he had faith, he could achieve what can be achieved by one who
has faith; if he was free from illness, he could achieve what can
be achieved by one who is free from illness; if he was honest and
sincere, he could achieve what can be achieved by one who is
honest and sincere; if he was energetic, he could achieve what
can be achieved by one who is energetic; if he was wise, he
could achieve what can be achieved by one who is wise. What
do you think, prince? Could that man train under you in the art
of wielding a goad while riding an elephant?"

"Venerable sir, even if he had one of those qualities he could
train under me, so what of the five?"

58. "So too, prince, there are these five factors of striving. What
five? Here a bhikkhu has faith, he places his faith in the
Tathagata's enlightenment thus: 'That Blessed One is accom-
plished, fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge and con-
duct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of persons
to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened, blessed.'

"Then he is free from illness and affliction, possessing a good
digestion that is neither too cool nor too warm but medium arid
able to bear the strain of striving.

"Then he is honest and sincere, and shows himself as he actu-
ally is to the Teacher and his companions in the holy life.

"Then he is energetic in abandoning unwholesome states and
in undertaking wholesome states, steadfast, launching his effort
with firmness and persevering in cultivating wholesome states.

"Then he is wise; he possesses wisdom regarding rise and disap-
pearance that is noble and penetrative and leads to the complete
destruction of suffering. These are the five factors of striving.


708 BodhirUjakumara Sutta: Sutta 85 ii 97


59. "Prince, when a bhikkhu who possesses these five factors
of striving finds a Tathagata to discipline him, he might dwell
seven years until by realising for himself with direct knowledge,
he here and now enters upon and abides in that supreme goal of
the holy life for the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth
from the home life into homelessness. [96]

"Let alone seven years, prince. When a bhikkhu who possess-
es these five factors of striving finds a Tathagata to discipline
him, he might dwell six years... five years... four years... three
years. ..two years.. .one year. ..Let alone one year, prince,. ..he
might dwell seven months... six months... five months... four
months. ..three months. ..two months. ..one month. ..half a
month... Let alone half a month, prince,... he might dwell seven
days and nights... six days and nights... five days and nights...
four days and nights... three days and nights... two days and
nights. . .one day and night.

"Let alone one day and night, prince. When a bhikkhu who
possesses these five factors of striving finds a Tathagata to disci-
pline him, then being instructed in the evening, he might arrive
at distinction in the morning; being instructed in the morning,
he might arrive at distinction in the evening."

60. When this was said. Prince Bodhi said to the Blessed One:
"Oh the Buddha! Oh the Dhamma! Oh, how well proclaimed is
the Dhamma! For one instructed in the evening might arrive at
distinction in the morning, and one instructed in the morning
might arrive at distinctibn in the evening."

61. When this was said, the brahmin student Sanjikaputta said
to Prince Bddhi: "Master Bodhi says: 'Oh the Buddha! Oh the
Dhamma! Oh, how well proclaimed is the Dhamma!' But he
does not say: 'I go to Master Gotama for refuge and to the
Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.'"

"Do not say that, my dear Sanjikaputta, do not say that. I
heard and learned this from my mother's lips: [97] There was an
occasion when the Blessed One was living at KosambI in
Ghosita's Park. Then my mother, who was pregnant, went to the
Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, she sat down at
one side and said to him: 'Venerable sir, the prince or princess in
my womb, whichever it may be, goes to the Blessed One for
refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus. Let
the Blessed One remember [the child] as a lay follower who has


To Prince Bodhi 709


ii 97


gone to him for refuge for life.' There was also an occasion when
the Blessed One was living here in the country of the Bhaggas at
Sumsumaragira in the Bhesakala Grove, the Deer Park. Then my
nurse, carrying me on her hip, went to the Blessed One, and
after paying homage to him, she stood at one side and said to
him: 'Venerable sir, this Prince Bodhi goes to the Blessed One
for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus.
Let the Blessed One remember him as a lay follower who has
gone to him for refuge for life.' Now, my dear Sanjikaputta, for
the third time I go to the Blessed One for refuge and to the
Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus. Let the Blessed One
remember me as a lay follower who has gone to him for refuge
for life."


1


86 Angulimala Sutta
On Angulimala


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Savatthl in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.

2. Now on that occasion there was a bandit in the realm of
King Pasenadi of Kosala named Angulimala, who was murder-
ous, bloody-handed, given to blows and violence, merciless to
living beings. Villages, towns, [98] and districts were laid waste
by him. He was constantly murdering people and he wore their
fingers as a garland. 820

3. Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One dressed, and
taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Savatthl for alms.
When he had wandered for alms in Savatthl and had returned
from his almsround, after his meal he set his resting place in
order, and taking his bowl and outer robe, set out on the road
leading towards Angulimala. Cowherds, shepherds, and
ploughmen passing by s t aw the Blessed One walking along the
road leading towards Angulimala and told him: "Do not take
this road, recluse. On this road is the bandit Angulimala, who is
murderous, bloody-handed, given to blows and violence, merci-
less to living beings. Villages, towns, and districts have been
laid waste by him. He is constantly murdering people and he
wears their fingers as a garland. Men have come along this road
in groups of ten, twenty, thirty, and even forty, but still they
have fallen into Angulimala' s hands." When this was said the
Blessed One went on in silence.

For the second time... For the third time the cowherds, shep-
herds, and ploughmen told this to the Blessed One, but still the
Blessed One went on in silence.

4. The bandit Angulimala saw the Blessed One coming in the
distance. When he saw him, he thought: "It is wonderful, it is
marvellous! Men have come along this road in groups of ten.


710


ii 100


On Angulimala 711


twenty, [99] thirty, and even forty, but still they have fallen
into my hands. And now this recluse comes alone, unaccompa-
nied, as if driven by fate. Why shouldn't I take this recluse's
life?" Angulimala then took up his sword and shield, buckled
on his bow and quiver, and followed close behind the Blessed
One.

5. Then the Blessed One performed such a feat of supernormal
power that the bandit Angulimala, though walking as fast as he
could, could not catch up with the Blessed One, who was walk-
ing at his normal pace. Then the bandit Angulimala thought: "It
is wonderful, it is marvellous! Formerly I could catch up even
with a swift elephant and seize it; I could catch up even with a
swift horse and seize it; I could catch up even with a swift chariot
and seize it; I could catch up even with a swift deer and seize it;
but now, though I am walking as fast as I can, I cannot catch up
with this recluse who is walking at his normal pace!" He stopped
and called out to the Blessed One: "Stop, recluse! Stop, recluse!"

"1 have stopped, Angulimala, you stop too."

Then the bandit Angulimala thought: "These recluses, sons of
the Sakyans, speak truth, assert truth; but though this recluse is
still walking, he says: 'I have stopped, Angulimala, you stop
too.' Suppose I question this recluse."

6. Then the bandit Angulimala addressed the Blessed One in
stanzas thus:

"While you are walking, recluse, you tell me you have
stopped;

But now, when I have stopped, you say I have not stopped.

I ask you now, O recluse, about the meaning:

How is it that you have stopped and I have not?"

"Angulimala, I have stopped forever,

I abstain from violence towards living beings;

But you have no restraint towards things that live:

That is why I have stopped and you have not." [100]

"Oh, at long last this recluse, a venerated sage.

Has come to this great forest for my sake. 821
Having heard your stanza teaching me the Dhamma,

I will indeed renounce evil forever."


712 Angulimala Sutta: Sutta 86


ii 101


So saying, the bandit took his sword and weapons
And flung them in a gaping chasm's pit;

The bandit worshipped the Sublime One's feet.

And then and there asked for the going forth.

The Enlightened One, the Sage of Great Compassion,

The Teacher of the world with [all] its gods.

Addressed him with these words, "Come, bhikkhu."

And that was how he came to be a bhikkhu. 822

7. Then the Blessed One set out to wander back to Savatthl
with Angulimala as his attendant. Wandering by stages, he
eventually arrived at Savatthl, and there he lived at Savatthl in
Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.

8. Now on that occasion great crowds of people were gathering
at the gates of King Pasenadi's inner palace, very loud and noisy,
crying: "Sire, the bandit Angulimala is in your realm; he is mur-
derous, bloody-handed, given to blows and violence, merciless
to living beings! Villages, towns, and districts have been laid
waste by him! He is constantly murdering people and he wears
their fingers as a garland! The king must put him down!"

9. Then in the middle of the day King Pasenadi of Kosala
drove out of Savatthl with a cavalry of five hundred men and
set out for the park. He drove thus as far as the road was pass-
able for carriages, and then he dismounted from his carriage
and went forward on fopt to the Blessed One. [101] After paying
homage to the Blessed One, he sat down at one side, and the
Blessed One said to him: "What is it, great king? Is King Seniya
Bimbisara of Magadha attacking you, or the Licchavis of Vesall,
or other hostile kings?"

10. "Venerable sir. King Seniya Bimbisara of Magadha is not
attacking me, nor are the Licchavis of Vesall, nor are other hos-
tile kings. But there is a bandit in my realm named Angulimala,
who is murderous, bloody-handed, given to blows and violence,
merciless to living beings. Villages, towns, and districts have
been laid waste by him. He is constantly murdering people and
he wears their fingers as a garland. I shall never be able to put
him down, venerable sir."

11. "Great king, suppose you were to see that Angulimala had
shaved off his hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and gone


ii 102


On Angulimala 7 13


forth from the home life into homelessness; that he was abstain-
ing from killing living beings, from taking what is not given and
from false speech; that he was refraining from eating at night,
ate only in one part of the day, and was celibate, virtuous, of
good character. If you were to see him thus, how would you
treat him?"

"Venerable sir, we would pay homage to him, or rise up for
him, or invite him to be seated; or we would invite him to accept
robes, almsfood, a resting place, or medicinal requisites; or we
would arrange for him lawful guarding, defence, and protection.
But, venerable sir, he is an immoral man, one of evil character.
How could he ever have such virtue and restraint?"

12. Now on that occasion the venerable Angulimala was sit-
ting not far from the Blessed One. Then the Blessed One extended
his right arm and said to King Pasenadi of Kosala: "Great king,
this is Angulimala."

Then King Pasenadi was frightened, alarmed, and terrified.
Knowing this, the Blessed One told him: "Do not be afraid,
great king, do not be afraid. There is nothing for you to fear
from him."

Then the king's fear, [102] alarm, and terror subsided. He
went over to the venerable Angulimala and said: "Venerable sir,
is the noble lord really Angulimala?"

"Yes, great king."

"Venerable sir, of what family is the noble lord's father? Of
what family is his mother?"

"My father is a Gagga, great king; my mother is a Mantani."

"Let the noble lord Gagga Mantaniputta rest content. I shall
provide robes, almsfood, resting place, and medicinal requisites
for the noble lord Gagga Mantaniputta."

13. Now at that time the venerable Angulimala was a forest
dweller, an almsfood eater, a refuse-rag wearer, and restricted
himself to three robes. He replied: "Enough, great king, my
triple robe is complete."

King Pasenadi then returned to the Blessed One, and after
paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and said: "It is
wonderful, venerable sir, it is marvellous how the Blessed One
tames the untamed, brings peace to the unpeaceful, and leads to
Nibbana those who have not attained Nibbana. Venerable sir, we
ourselves could not tame him with force and weapons, yet the


714 Angulimala Sutta: Sutta 86


ii 103


Blessed One has tamed him without force or weapons. And now,
venerable sir, we depart. We are busy and have much to do."

"Now is the time, great king, to do as you think fit."

Then King Pasenadi of Kosala rose from his seat, and after
paying homage to the Blessed One, keeping him on his right, he
departed.

14. Then, when it was morning, the venerable Angulimala
dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Savatthl
for alms. As he was wandering for alms from house to house in
Savatthl, he saw a certain woman giving birth to a deformed
child. [103] When he saw this, he thought: "How beings are
afflicted! Indeed, how beings are afflicted!"

When he had wandered for alms in Savatthl and had returned
from his almsround, after his meal he went to the Blessed One,
and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and said:
"Venerable sir, in the morning I dressed, and taking my bowl
and outer robe, went into Savatthl for alms. As I was wandering
for alms from house to house in Savatthl, I saw a certain woman
giving birth to a deformed child. When I saw that, I thought:
'How beings are afflicted! Indeed, how beings are afflicted!'"

15. "In that case, Angulimala, go into Savatthl and say to that
woman: 'Sister, since I was bom, I do not recall that I have ever
intentionally deprived a living being of life. By this truth, may
you be well and may your infant be well!"'

"Venerable sir, wouldn't I be telling a deliberate lie, for I have
intentionally deprived many living beings of life?"

"Then, Angulimala, go into Savatthl and say to that woman:
'Sister, since I was born with the noble birth, I do not recall that I
have ever intentionally deprived a living being of life. By this
truth, may you be well and may your infant be well!"' 823

"Yes, venerable sir," the venerable Angulimala replied, and
having gone into Savatthl, he told that woman: "Sister, since I
was bom with the noble birth, I do not recall that I have ever
intentionally deprived a living being of life. By this truth, may
you be well and may your infant be well!" Then the woman and
the infant became well.

16. Before long, dwelling alone, withdrawn, diligent, ardent,
and resolute, the venerable Angulimala, by realising for himself
with direct knowledge, here and now entered upon and abided
in that supreme goal of the holy life for the sake of which


ii 104


On Angulimala 7 15


clansmen rightly go forth from the home life into homelessness.
He directly knew: "Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been
lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no more com-
ing to any state of being." [104] And the venerable Angulimala
became one of the arahants.

17. Then, when it was morning, the venerable Angulimala
dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Savatthi
for alms. Now on that occasion someone threw a clod and hit the
venerable Angulimala 's body, someone else threw a stick and hit
his body, and someone else threw a potsherd and hit his body.
Then, with blood running from his cut head, with his bowl bro-
ken, and with his outer robe torn, the venerable Angulimala
went to the Blessed One. The Blessed One saw him coming in the
distance and told him: "Bear it, brahmin! Bear it, brahmin! You
are experiencing here and now the result of deeds because of
which you might have been tortured in hell for many years, for
many hundreds of years, for many thousands of years." 824

18. Then, while the venerable Angulimala was alone in
retreat experiencing the bliss of deliverance, he uttered this
exclamation: 825

"Who once did live in negligence
And then is negligent no more.

He illuminates the world

Like the moon freed from a cloud.

Who checks the evil deeds he did
By doing wholesome deeds instead.

He illuminates the world

Like the moon freed from a cloud.

The youthful bhikkhu who devotes
His efforts to the Buddha's teaching.

He illuminates the world

Like the moon freed from a cloud.

Let my enemies hear discourse on the Dhamma,

Let them be devoted to the Buddha's teaching.

Let my enemies wait on those good people
Who lead others to accept the Dhamma.


716 Angulimala Sutta: Sutta 86


ii 105


[105] Let my enemies give ear from time to time
And hear the Dhamma of those who preach forbearance.
Of those who speak as well in praise of kindness.

And let them follow up that Dhamma with kind deeds.

For surely then they would not wish to harm me.

Nor would they think of harming other beings.

So those who would protect all, frail or strong.

Let them attain the all-surpassing peace.

Conduit-makers guide the water,

Fletchers straighten out the arrow-shaft.

Carpenters straighten out the timber,

But wise men seek to tame themselves.

There are some that tame with beatings.

Some with goads and some with whips;

But I was tamed by such alone
Who has no rod nor any weapon.

'Harmless' is the name I bear.

Though I was dangerous in the past. 826
The name I bear today is true:

I hurt no living being at all.

And though I once lived as a bandit
With the name of 'Finger-garland/

One whom the great flood swept along,

I went for refuge to the Buddha.

And though I once was bloody-handed
With the name of 'Finger-garland/

See the refuge I have found:

The bond of being has been cut.

While I did many deeds that lead
To rebirth in the evil realms.

Yet their result has reached me now.

And so I eat free from debt. 827


ii 105


On Angulimala 717


They are fools and have no sense
Who give themselves to negligence.

But those of wisdom guard diligence
And treat it as their greatest good.

Do not give way to negligence
Nor seek delight in sensual pleasures.
But meditate with diligence
So as to reach the perfect bliss.

So welcome to that choice of mine
And let it stand, it was not ill made;

Of all the Dhammas known to men
I have come to the very best.

So welcome to that choice of mine
And let it stand, it was not ill made;

I have attained the triple knowledge
And done all that the Buddha teaches."


87 Piyajatika Sutta
Born from Those Who Are Dear


[106] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One
was living at Savatthl in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.

2. Now on that occasion a certain householder's dear and
beloved only son had died. After his son's death, he had no
more desire to work or to eat. He kept going to the charnel
ground and crying: "My only child, where are you? My only
child, where are you?"

3. Then that householder went to the Blessed One, and after
paying homage to him, sat down at one side. The Blessed One
said to him: "Householder, your faculties are not those of one in
control of his own mind. Your faculties are deranged."

"How could my faculties not be deranged, venerable sir? For
my dear and beloved only son has died. Since he died I have no
more desire to work or to eat. I keep going to the charnel
ground and crying: 'My only child, where are you? My only
child, where are you?"' *

"So it is, householder, so it is! Sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief,
and despair are bom from those who are dear, arise from those
who are dear."

"Venerable sir, who would ever think that sorrow, lamenta-
tion, pain, grief, and despair are bom from those who are dear,
arise from those who are dear? Venerable sir, happiness and joy
are born from those who are dear, arise from those who are
dear." Then, displeased with the Blessed One's words, disap-
proving of them, the householder rose from his seat and left.

4. Now on that occasion some gamblers were playing with
dice not far from the Blessed One. Then the householder went to
those gamblers and said: "Just now, sirs, [107] I went to the
recluse Gotama, and after paying homage to him, I sat down at
one side. When I had done so, the recluse Gotama said to me:


718


ii 108


Born from Those Who Are Dear 719


'Householder, your faculties are not those of one in control of
his own mind .'...(repeat the entire conversation as above)... 'Vener-
able sir, happiness and joy are bom from those who are dear,
arise from those who are dear.' Then, displeased with the
recluse Gotama's words, disapproving of them, I rose from my
seat and left."

"So it is, householder, so it is! Happiness and joy are born
from those who are dear, arise from those who are dear."

Then the householder left thinking: "I agree with the gamblers."

5. Eventually this story reached the king's palace. Then King
Pasenadi of Kosala told Queen Mallika: "This is what has been
said by the recluse Gotama, Mallika: 'Sorrow, lamentation, pain,
grief, and despair are bom from those who are dear, arise from
those who are dear.'"

"If that has been said by the Blessed One, sire, then it is so."

"No matter what the recluse Gotama says, Mallika applauds it
thus: 'If that has been said by the Blessed One, sire, then it is so.'
Just as a pupil applauds whatever his teacher says to him, say-
ing: 'So it is, teacher, so it is!'; so too, Mallika, no matter what
the recluse Gotama says, you applaud it thus: 'If that [108] has
been said by the Blessed One, sire, then it is so.' Be off, Mallika,
away with you!"

6. Then Queen Mallika addressed the brahmin Nalijangha:
"Come, brahmin, go to the Blessed One andjaay homage in my
name with your head at his feet, and ask whether he is free from
illness and affliction and is healthy, strong, and abiding in com-
fort, saying: 'Venerable sir. Queen Mallika pays homage with
her head at the Blessed One's feet and asks whether the Blessed
One is free from illness... and abiding in comfort.' Then say this:
'Venerable sir, have these words been uttered by the Blessed
One: "Sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair are bom
from those who are dear, arise from those who are dear"?' Learn
well what the Blessed One replies and report it to me; for
Tathagatas do not speak untruth."

"Yes, madam," he replied, and he went to the Blessed One
and exchanged greetings with him. When this courteous and
amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and said:
"Master Gotama, Queen Mallika pays homage with her head at
Master Gotama's feet and asks whether he is free from
illness... and abiding in comfort. And she says this: 'Venerable


720 Piyajatika Sutta: Sutta 87


ii 109


sir, have these words been spoken by the Blessed One: "Sorrow,
lamentation, pain, grief, and despair are born from those who
are dear, arise from those who are dear"?"'

7. "So it is, brahmin, so it is! Sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief,
and despair are born from those who are dear, arise from those
who are dear.

8. "It can be understood from this, brahmin, how sorrow,
lamentation, pain, grief, and despair are bom from those who are
dear, arise from those who are dear. Once in this same Savatthl
there was a certain woman whose mother died. Owing to her
mother's death, she went mad, lost her mind, and wandered
from street to street and from crossroad to crossroad, saying:
'Have you seen my mother? Have you seen my mother?' [109]

9-14. "And it can also be understood from this how sorrow,
lamentation, pain, grief, and despair are born from those who
are dear, arise from those who are dear. Once in this same
Savatthl there was a certain woman whose father died... whose
brother died. ..whose sister died. ..whose son died. ..whose
daughter died... whose husband died. Owing to her husband's
death, she went mad, lost her mind, and wandered from street
to street and from crossroad to crossroad, saying: 'Have you
seen my husband? Have you seen my husband?'

15-21. "And it can also be understood from this how sorrow,
lamentation, pain,_grief, and despair are born from those who
are dear, arise from those who are dear. Once in this same
Savatthl there was a certain man whose mother died... whose
father died. ..whose brother died. ..whose sister died. ..whose
son died. ..whose daughter died. ..whose wife died. Owing to
his wife's death, he went mad, lost his mind, and wandered
from street to street and from crossroad to crossroad, saying:
'Have you seen my wife? Have you seen my wife?'

22. "And it can also be understood from this how sorrow,
lamentation, pain, grief, and despair are born from those who
are dear, arise from those who are dear. Once in this same
Savatthl there was a certain woman who went to live with her
relatives' family. Her relatives wanted to divorce her from her
husband and give her to another whom she did not want. Then
the woman said to her husband: 'Lord, these relatives of mine
want to divorce me from you and give me to another whom I


am


Born from Those Who Are Dear 721


do not want.' Then the man cut the woman in two and [110] com-
mitted suicide, thinking: 'We shall be together in the afterlife.' It
can also be understood from this how sorrow, lamentation, pain,
grief, and despair are born from those who are dear, arise from
those who are dear."

23. Then, delighting and rejoicing in the Blessed One's words,
the brahmin Nalijangha rose from his seat, went to Queen
Mallika, and reported to her his entire conversation with the
Blessed One.

24. Then Queen Mallika went to King Pasenadi of Kosala
and asked him: "What do you think, sire? Is Princess Vajlri dear
to you?"

"Yes, Mallika, Princess Vajlri is dear to me."

"What do you think, sire? If change and alteration 828 took
place in Princess Vajlri, would sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief,
and despair arise in you?"

"Change and alteration in Princess Vajlri would mean an
alteration in my life. How could sorrow, lamentation, pain,
grief, and despair not arise in me?"

"It was with reference to this, sire, that the Blessed One who
knows and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened, said:
'Sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair are born from
those who are dear, arise from those who are dear.'

25-28. "What do you think, sire? Is the noble Queen Vasabha
dear to you?. ..Is General Vidudabha dear to you?. ..[111]. ..Am I
dear to you?... Are Kasi and Kosala dear to you?" 829

"Yes, Mallika, Kasi and Kosala are dear to me. We owe it to
Kasi and Kosala that we use Kasi sandalwood and wear gar-
lands, scents, and unguents."

"What do you think, sire? If change and alteration took place
in Kasi and Kosala, would sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and
despair arise in you?"

"Change and alteration in Kasi and Kosala would mean an
alteration in my life. How could sorrow, lamentation, pain,
grief, and despair not arise in me?"

"It was with reference to this, sire, that the Blessed One who
knows and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened, said:
'Sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair are born from
those who are dear, arise from those who are dear.'"


722 Piyajatika Sutta: Sutta 87


ii 112


29. "It is wonderful, Mallika, it is marvellous how far [112] the
Blessed One penetrates with wisdom and sees with wisdom!
Come, Mallika, give me the ablution water." 830

Then King Pasenadi of Kosala rose from his seat, and arrang-
ing his upper robe on one shoulder, he extended his hands in
reverential salutation towards the Blessed One and uttered this
exclamation three times: "Honour to the Blessed One, accom-
plished and fully enlightened! Honour to the Blessed One,
accomplished and fully enlightened! Honour to the Blessed One,
accomplished and fully enlightened!"


88 Bahitika Sutta
The Cloak


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Savatthi in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.

2. Then, when it was morning, the venerable Ananda dressed,
and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Savatthi for alms.
When he had wandered for alms in Savatthi and had returned
from his almsround, after his meal he went to the Eastern Park,
to the Palace of Migara's Mother, for the day's abiding.

3. Now on that occasion King Pasenadi of Kosala had mount-
ed the elephant Ekapundarlka and was riding out from Savatthi
at midday. He saw the venerable Ananda coming in the distance
and asked the minister Sirivaddha: "That is the venerable
Ananda, is it not?" - "Yes, sire, that is the venerable Ananda."

4. Then King Pasenadi of Kosala told a man: "Come, good
man, go to the venerable Ananda and pay homage in my name
with your head at his feet, saying: 'Venerable sir. King Pasenadi
of Kosala pays homage with his head at the venerable Ananda's
feet.' Then say this: 'Venerable sir, if the venerable Ananda has
no urgent business, perhaps the venerable Ananda would wait
[113] a moment, out of compassion.'"

5. "Yes, sire," the man replied, and he went to the venerable
Ananda, and after paying homage to him, he stood at one side
and said to the venerable Ananda: "Venerable sir. King
Pasenadi of Kosala pays homage with his head at the venerable
Ananda's feet and he says this: 'Venerable sir, if the venerable
Ananda has no urgent business, perhaps the venerable Ananda
would wait a moment, out of compassion.'"

6. The venerable Ananda consented in silence. Then King
Pasenadi went by elephant as far as the elephant could go, and
then he dismounted and went to the venerable Ananda on foot.
After paying homage to him, he stood at one side and said to the


723


724 Bahitika Sutta: Sutta 88


ii


venerable Ananda: "If/venerable sir, the venerable Ananda has
no urgent business, it would be good if he would go to the bank
of the river AciravaH, out of compassion."

7. The venerable Ananda consented in silence. He went to the
bank of the river AciravaH and sat down at the root of a tree on a
seat made ready. Then King Pasenadi went by elephant as far as
the elephant could go, and then he dismounted and went to the
venerable Ananda on foot. After paying homage to him, he stood
at one side and said to the venerable Ananda: "Here, venerable
sir, is an elephant rug. Let the venerable Ananda be seated on it."

"There is no need, great king. Sit down. I am sitting on my
own mat."

8. King Pasenadi of Kosala sat down on a seat made ready and
said: "Venerable Ananda, would the Blessed One behave with
the body in such a way that he could be censured by wise reclus-
es and brahmins?" 831

"No, great king, the Blessed One would not behave with the
body in such a way that he could be censured by wise recluses
and brahmins." [114]

"Would the Blessed One, venerable Ananda, behave with
speech... behave with the mind in such a way that he could be
censured by wise recluses and brahmins?"

"No, great king, the Blessed One would not behave with
speech... behave with the mind in such a way that he could be
censured by wise recluses and brahmins."

9. "It is wonderful, venerable sir, it is marvellous! For what we
were unable to accomplish with a question has been accom-
plished by the venerable Ananda with the answer to the ques-
tion. We do not recognise anything of value in the praise and
blame of others spoken by foolish ignorant persons, who speak
without having investigated and evaluated; but we recognise as
valuable the praise and blame of others spoken by wise, intelli-
gent, and sagacious persons who speak after having investigated
and evaluated.

10. "Now, venerable Ananda, what kind of bodily behaviour
is censured by wise recluses and brahmins?"

"Any bodily behaviour that is unwholesome, great king."

"Now, venerable Ananda, what kind of bodily behaviour is
unwholesome?"

"Any bodily behaviour that is blameworthy, great king."


ii 115


The Cloak 725


“Now, venerable Ananda, what kind of bodily behaviour is
blameworthy? "

"Any bodily behaviour that brings affliction, great king."

"Now, venerable Ananda, what kind of bodily behaviour
brings affliction?"

"Any bodily behaviour that has painful results, great king/'

"Now, venerable Ananda, what kind of bodily behaviour has
painful results?"

"Any bodily behaviour, great king, that leads to one's own
affliction, or to the affliction of others, or to the affliction of both,
and on account of which unwholesome states increase and
wholesome states dimmish. Such bodily behaviour is censured
by wise recluses and brahmins, great king." 832

11. "Now, venerable Ananda, what kind of verbal behaviour
is censured by wise recluses and brahmins?"

"Any verbal behaviour that is unwholesome... (complete as in
§10, substituting "verbal behaviour "for "bodily behaviour"). . ."

12. "Now, venerable Ananda, what kind of mental behaviour
is censured by wise recluses and brahmins?"

"Any mental behaviour that is unwholesome... (complete as in
§10, substituting "mental behaviour" for "bodily behaviour")
[115]..."

13. "Now, venerable Ananda, does the Blessed One praise
only the abandoning of all unwholesome states?"

"The Tathagata, great king, has abandoned all unwholesome
states and he possesses wholesome states." 833

14. "Now, venerable Ananda, what kind of bodily behaviour
is uncensured by wise recluses and brahmins?"

"Any bodily behaviour that is wholesome, great king."

"Now, venerable Ananda, what kind of bodily behaviour is
wholesome?"

"Any bodily behaviour that is blameless, great king."

"Now, venerable Ananda, what kind of bodily behaviour is
blameless?"

"Any bodily behaviour that does not bring affliction, great king."

"Now, venerable Ananda, what kind of bodily behaviour does
not bring affliction?"

"Any bodily behaviour that has pleasant results, great king.".

"Now, venerable Ananda, what kind of bodily behaviour has
pleasant results?"


726 Bahitika Sutta: Sutta 88


iill 7


"Any bodily behaviour, great king, that does not lead to one's
own affliction, or to the affliction of others, or to the affliction of
both, and on account of which unwholesome states diminish
and wholesome states increase. Such bodily behaviour, great
king, is uncensured by wise recluses and brahmins."

15. "Now, venerable Ananda, what kind of verbal behaviour
is uncensured by wise recluses and brahmins?"

"Any verbal behaviour that is wholesome... (complete as in §14,
substituting "verbal behaviour" for "bodily behaviour")..."

16. "Now, venerable Ananda, what kind of mental behaviour
is uncensured by wise recluses and brahmins?"

"Any mental behaviour that is wholesome. . .(complete as in §14,
substituting "mental behaviour "/or "bodily behaviour") [116]. . . "

17. "Now, venerable Ananda, does the Blessed One praise
only the undertaking of all wholesome states?"

"The Tathagata, great king, has abandoned all unwholesome
states and possesses wholesome states."

18. "It is wonderful, venerable sir, it is marvellous how well
that has been expressed by the venerable Ananda! And we are
satisfied and pleased by what has been so well expressed by
him. Venerable sir, we are so satisfied and pleased with what
has been so well expressed by the venerable Ananda that if the
elephant-treasure were allowed to him, we would give it to him;
if the horse-treasure were allowed to him, we would give it to
him; if the boon of a village were allowed to him, we would give
it to him. But we know, venerable sir, that these are not allow-
able for the venerable Ananda. But there is this cloak of mine, 834
venerable sir, which was sent to me packed in a royal umbrella
case by King Ajatasattu of Magadha, sixteen hands long and
eight hands wide. Let the venerable Ananda accept it out of
compassion."

"It is not necessary, great king. My triple robe is complete." [117]

19. "Venerable sir, this river Aciravatl has been seen both by
the venerable Ananda and by ourselves when a great cloud has
rained heavily on the mountains; then this river Aciravatl over-
flows both its banks. So too, venerable sir, the venerable Ananda
can make a triple robe for himself out of this cloak, and he can
share out his old triple robe among his companions in the holy
life. In this way, our offering will overflow. Venerable sir, let the
venerable Ananda accept the cloak."


ii 117


The Cloak 727


20. The venerable Ananda accepted the cloak. Then King
Pasenadi of Kosala said: "And now, venerable sir, we depart.
We are busy and have much to do."

"Now is the time, great king, to do as you think fit."

Then King Pasenadi of Kosala, having delighted and rejoiced
in the venerable Ananda's words, rose from his seat, and after
paying homage to the venerable Ananda, keeping him on his
right, he departed.

21. Then soon after he had left, the venerable Ananda went to
the Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, he sat down
at one side, related to him his entire conversation with King
Pasenadi of Kosala, and presented the cloak to the Blessed One.

22. Then the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus: "It is a gain,
bhikkhus, for King Pasenadi of Kosala, it is a great gain for King
Pasenadi of Kosala that he has had the opportunity of seeing
and paying respect to Ananda."

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


89 Dhammacetiya Sutta
Monuments to the Dhamma


[118] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One
was living in the Sakyan country at a town of the Sakyans
named Medalumpa.

2. Now on that occasion King Pasenadi of Kosala had arrived
at Nagaraka for some business or other. Then he addressed
Digha Karayana: 835 "Dear Karayana, have the state carriages pre-
pared. Let us go to the pleasure garden to see a pleasing spot."

"Yes, sire," Digha Karayana replied. When the state carriages
were prepared, he informed the king: "Sire, the state carriages
are ready for you. Now is the time to do as you think fit."

3. Then King Pasenadi mounted a state carriage, and accom-
panied by the other carriages, he drove out from Nagaraka with
the full pomp of royalty and proceeded towards the park. He
went thus as far as the road was passable for carriages and then
dismounted from his carriage and entered the park on foot.

4. As he walked and wandered in the park for exercise. King
Pasenadi saw roots of trees that were lovely and inspiring, quiet
and undisturbed by voices, with an atmosphere of seclusion,
remote from people, favourable for retreat. The sight of these
reminded him of the Blessed One thus: "These roots of trees are
lovely and inspiring, quiet and undisturbed by voices, with an
atmosphere of seclusion, remote from people, favourable for
retreat, like the places where we used to pay respect to the
Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened." Then he told
Digha Karayana what he had thought and asked: "Where is he
living now, [119] the Blessed One, accomplished and fully
enlightened?"

5. "There is, sire, a town of the Sakyans named Medalumpa-
The Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened, is now
living there."


728


ii 120


Monuments to the Dhamma 729


"How far is it from Nagaraka to Medalumpa?"

"It is not far, sire, three leagues. 836 There is still daylight
enough to go there."

"Then, dear Karayana, have the state carriages prepared. Let us
go and see the Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened."

"Yes, sire," he replied. When the state carriages were pre-
pared, he informed the king: "Sire, the state carriages are ready
for you. Now is the time to do as you think fit."

6. Then King Pasenadi mounted a state carriage, and accom-
panied by the other carriages, set out from Nagaraka towards
the Sakyan town of Medalumpa. He arrived there while it was
still daylight and proceeded towards the park. He went thus as
far as the road was passable for carriages, and then he dis-
mounted from his carriage and entered the park on foot.

7. Now on that occasion a number of bhikkhus were walking
up and down in the open. Then King Pasenadi went to them
and asked: "Venerable sirs, where is he living now, the Blessed
One, accomplished and fully enlightened? We want to see the
Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened."

8. "That is his dwelling, great king, with the closed door. Go
up to it quietly, without hurrying, enter the porch, clear your
throat, and tap on the panel. The Blessed One will open the door
for you." King Pasenadi handed over his sword and turban to
Dlgha Karayana then and there. Then Dlgha Karayana thought:
"So the king is going into secret session now! And I have to wait
here alone now!" 837 Without hurrying. King Pasenadi went qui-
etly up to the dwelling with the closed door, entered the porch,
cleared his throat, and tapped on the panel. The Blessed One
opened the door.

9. Then King Pasenadi [120] entered the dwelling. Prostrating
himself with his head at the Blessed One's feet, he covered the
Blessed One's feet with kisses and caressed them with his
hands, pronouncing his name: "I am King Pasenadi of Kosala,
venerable sir; I am King Pasenadi of Kosala, venerable sir."

"But, great king, what reason do you see for doing such
supreme honour to this body and for showing such friendship?"

10. "Venerable sir, I infer according to Dhamma about the
Blessed One: 'The Blessed One is fully enlightened, the Dhamma
is well proclaimed by the Blessed One, the Sangha of the Blessed
One's disciples is practising the good way.' Now, venerable sir, I


ii 121


730 Dhammacetiya Sutta: Sutta 89


see some recluses and brahmins leading a limited holy life for
ten years, twenty years, thirty years, or forty years, and then on
a later occasion I see them well groomed and well anointed,
with trimmed hair and beards, enjoying themselves provided
and endowed with the five cords of sensual pleasure. But here I
see bhikkhus leading the perfect and pure holy life as long as
life and breath last. Indeed, I do not see any other holy life else-
where as perfect and pure as this. This is why, venerable sir, I
infer according to Dhamma about the Blessed One: 'The Blessed
One is fully enlightened, the Dhamma is well proclaimed by the
Blessed One, the Sangha of the Blessed One's disciples is practis-
ing the good way.'

11. "Again, venerable sir, kings quarrel with kings, nobles
with nobles, brahmins with brahmins, householders with house-
holders; mother quarrels with child, child with mother, father
with child, child with father; brother quarrels with brother,
brother with sister, sister with brother, friend with friend. 838 But
here I see bhikkhus living in concord, with mutual appreciation,
without disputing, blending like milk and water, [121] viewing
each other with kindly eyes. I do not see any other assembly
elsewhere with such concord. This too, venerable sir, is why I
infer according to Dhamma about the Blessed One: 'The Blessed
One is fully enlightened, the Dhamma is well proclaimed by the
Blessed One, the Sangha of the Blessed One's disciples is practis-
ing the good way.'

12. "Again, venerable sir, I have walked and wandered from
park to park and from garden to garden. There I have seen some
recluses and brahmins who are lean, wretched, unsightly, jaun-
diced, with veins standing out on their limbs, such that people
would not want to look at them again. I have thought: 'Surely
these venerable ones are leading the holy life in discontent, or
they have done some evil deed and are concealing it, so lean and
wretched are they... such that people would not want to look at
them again.' I went up to them and asked: 'Why are you vener-
able ones so lean and wretched... such that people would not
want to look at you again?' Their reply was: 'It is our family
sickness, great king.' But here I see bhikkhus smiling and cheer-
ful, sincerely joyful, plainly delighting, their faculties fresh, liv-
ing at ease, unruffled, subsisting on what others give, abiding
with mind [as aloof] as a wild deer's. I have thought: 'Surely


ii 122


Monuments to the Dhamma 731


these venerable ones perceive successive states of lofty distinc-
tion in the Blessed One's Dispensation, since they abide thus
smiling and cheerful... with mind [as aloof] as a wild deer's.'
This too, venerable sir, is why I infer according to Dhamma
about the Blessed One: 'The Blessed One is fully enlightened,
the Dhamma is well proclaimed by the Blessed One, the Sangha
of the Blessed One's disciples is practising the good way.' ^

13. "Again, venerable sir, being a head-anointed noble king,
[122] I am able to have executed those who should be executed,
to fine those who should be fined, to exile those who should be
exiled. Yet when I am sitting in council, they break in and inter-
rupt me. Though I say. 'Gentlemen, do not break in and inter-
rupt me when I am sitting in council; wait till the end of my
speech,' still they break in and interrupt me. But here I see
bhikkhus while the Blessed One is teaching the Dhamma 839 to
an assembly of several hundred followers and then there is not
even the sound of a disciple of the Blessed One coughing or
clearing his throat. Once the Blessed One was teaching the
Dhamma to an assembly of several hundred followers and there
a disciple of his cleared his throat. Thereupon one of his com-
panions in the holy life nudged him with his knee to indicate:
'Be quiet, venerable sir, make no noise; the Blessed One, the
Teacher, is teaching us the Dhamma.' I thought: 'It is wonderful,
it is marvellous how an assembly can be so well disciplined
without force or weapon!' Indeed, I do not see any other assem-
bly elsewhere so well disciplined. This too, venerable sir, is why
I infer according to Dhamma about the Blessed One: 'The
Blessed One is fully enlightened, the Dhamma is well pro-
claimed by the Blessed One, the Sangha of the Blessed One's dis-
ciples is practising the good way.'

14. "Again, venerable sir, I have seen here certain learned
nobles who were clever, knowledgeable about the doctrines of
others, as sharp as hairsplitting marksmen; 840 they wander
about, as it were, demolishing the views of others with their
sharp wits. When they hear: 'The recluse Gotama will visit such
and such a village or town,' they formulate a question thus: 'We
will go to the recluse Gotama and ask him this question. If he is
asked like this, he will answer like this, and so we will refute his
doctrine in this way; and if he is asked like that, he will answer
like that, and so we will refute his doctrine in that way.' They


1


ii 124


732 Dhammacetiya Sutta: Sutta 89


hear: 'The recluse Gotama has come to visit such and such a vil-
lage or town.' They go to the Blessed One, and the Blessed One
instructs, urges, rouses, [123] and encourages them with a talk
on the Dhamma. After they have been instructed, urged, roused,
and encouraged by the Blessed One with a talk on the Dhamma,
they do not so much as ask him the question, so how should
they refute his doctrine? In actual fact, they become his disci-
ples. This too, venerable sir, is why I infer according to Dhamma
about the Blessed One: 'The Blessed One is fully enlightened,
the Dhamma is well proclaimed by the Blessed One, the Sangha
of the Blessed One's disciples is practising the good way.'

15. "Again, venerable sir, I have seen here certain learned
brahmins...

16. "Again, venerable sir, I have seen here certain learned
householders...

17. "Again, venerable sir, I have seen here certain learned
recluses... They do not so much as ask him the question, so how
should they refute his doctrine? In actual fact, they ask the
Blessed One to allow them to go forth from the home life into
homelessness, and he gives them the going forth. Not long after
they have thus gone forth, dwelling alone, withdrawn, diligent,
ardent, and resolute, by realising for themselves with direct
knowledge they here and now enter upon and abide in that
supreme goal of the holy life for the sake of which clansmen
rightly go forth from the home life into homelessness. They say
thus: 'We were very nearly lost, we very nearly perished, for
formerly we claimed that we were recluses though we were not
really recluses; we claimed that we were brahmins though we
were not really brahmins; we claimed that we were arahants
though we were not really arahants. But now we are recluses,
now we are brahmins, now we are arahants.' This too, venerable
sir, is why I infer according to Dhamma about the Blessed One:
'The Blessed One is fully enlightened, the Dhamma is well pro-
claimed by the Blessed One, the Sangha of the Blessed One's dis-
ciples is practising the good way.'

18. "Again, venerable sir, Isidatta and Purana, 841 my two
inspectors, eat my food and use my carriages; I provide them
with a livelihood and bring them fame. Yet in spite of this, they
are less respectful towards me [124] than they are towards the
Blessed One. Once when I had gone out leading an army and


ii 125


Monuments to the Dhamma 733


was testing these inspectors, Isidatta and Purana, I happened to
put up in very cramped quarters. Then these two inspectors,
Isidatta and Purana, after spending much of the night in talk on
the Dhamma, lay down with their heads in the direction where
they had heard that the Blessed One was staying and with their
feet towards me. I thought: 'It is wonderful, it is marvellous!
These two inspectors, Isidatta and Purana, eat my food and use
my carriages; I provide them with a livelihood and bring them
fame. Yet in spite of this, they are less respectful towards me
than they are towards the Blessed One. Surely these good peo-
ple perceive successive states of lofty distinction in the Blessed
One's Dispensation.' This too, venerable sir, is why I infer
according to Dhamma about the Blessed One: 'The Blessed One
is fully enlightened, the Dhamma is well proclaimed by the
Blessed One, the Sangha of the Blessed One's disciples is practis-
ing the good way.'

19. "Again, venerable sir, the Blessed One is a noble and I am
a noble; the Blessed One is a Kosalan and I am a Kosalan; the
Blessed One is eighty years old and I am eighty years old. 842
Since that is so, I think it proper to do such supreme honour to
the Blessed One and to show such friendship.

20. "And now, venerable sir, we depart. We are busy and have
much to do."

"Now is the time, great king, to do as you think fit."

Then King Pasenadi of Kosala rose from his seat, and after
paying homage to the Blessed One, keeping him on his right, he
departed. 843

21. Then soon after he had left, the Blessed One addressed the
bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus, before rising from his seat and
departing, this King Pasenadi uttered monuments to the
Dhamma. 844 Learn the monuments to the Dhamma, bhikkhus;
master [l25] the monuments to the Dhamma; remember the
monuments to the Dhamma. The monuments to the Dhamma
are beneficial, bhikkhus, and they belong to the fundamentals of
the holy life."

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


90 Kannakatthala Sutta
At Kannakatthala


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Ujunna, in the Kannakatthala Deer Park.

2. Now on that occasion King Pasenadi of Kosala had arrived
at Ujunna for some business or other. Then he told a man:
"Come, good man, go to the Blessed One and pay homage in my
name with your head at his feet, and ask whether he is free from
illness and affliction, and is healthy, strong, and abiding in com-
fort, saying: 'Venerable sir. King Pasenadi of Kosala pays
homage with his head at the Blessed One's feet, and he asks
whether the Blessed One is free from illness...and abiding in
comfort.' And say this: 'Venerable sir, today King Pasenadi of
Kosala will come to see the Blessed One after he has had his
breakfast.'"

"Yes, sire," the man replied, and he went to the Blessed One,
and after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and
delivered his message.

3. The sisters Soma and Sakula 845 heard: "Today [126] King
Pasenadi of Kosala will go to see the Blessed One after he has
had his breakfast."

Then, while the meal was being served, the two sisters went to
the king and said: "Sire, pay homage in our name with your
head at the Blessed One's feet, and ask whether he is free from
illness... and abiding in comfort, saying: 'Venerable sir, the sis-
ters Soma and Sakula pay homage with their heads at the
Blessed One's feet, and they ask whether he is free from ill-
ness. . .and abiding in comfort.'"

4. Then, when he had finished his breakfast, King Pasenadi of
Kosala went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to
him, he sat down at one side and delivered the message of the
sisters Soma and Sakula.


734


ii 127


At Kannakatthala 735


"But, great king, could the sisters Soma and Sakula find no
other messenger?"

"Venerable sir, the sisters Soma and Sakula heard: Today King
Pasenadi of Kosala will go to see the Blessed One after he has
had his breakfast/ Then, while the meal was being served, the
sisters Soma and Sakula came to me and said: 'Sire, pay homage
in our names with your head at the Blessed One's feet, and ask
whether he is free from illness. . .and abiding in comfort.'"

"May the sisters Soma and Sakula be happy, great king."

5. Then King Pasenadi of Kosala said to the Blessed One:
"Venerable sir, I have heard this: 'The recluse Gotama says:
"There is no recluse or brahmin who is omniscient and all-seeing,
who can claim to have complete knowledge and vision; that is not
possible.'" Venerable sir, do those who speak thus [127] say what
has been said by the Blessed One, and not misrepresent him with
what is contrary to fact? Do they explain in accordance with the
Dhamma in such a way that nothing that provides a ground for
censure can be legitimately deduced from their assertions?"

"Great King, those who speak thus do not say what has been
said by me, but misrepresent me with what is untrue and con-
trary to fact."

6. Then King Pasenadi of Kosala addressed General
Vidudabha: "General, who introduced this story into the palace?"

"It was Sanjaya, sire, the brahmin of the Akasa clan."

7. Then King Pasenadi of Kosala told a man: "Come, good
man, in my name tell Sanjaya, the brahmin of the Akasa clan:
'Venerable sir. King Pasenadi of Kosala calls you.'"

"Yes, sire," the man replied. He went to Sanjaya, the brahmin
of the Akasa clan, and told him: "Venerable sir. King Pasenadi
of Kosala calls you."

8. Meanwhile King Pasenadi of Kosala said to the Blessed
One: "Venerable sir, could something else have been said by the
Blessed One referring to that, and the person understood it
wrongly? In what way does the Blessed One recall making that
utterance?"

"I recall having actually made the utterance in this way, great
king: 'There is no recluse or brahmin who knows all, who sees
all, simultaneously; that is not possible.'" 846

"What the Blessed One has said appears reasonable, what the
Blessed One has said appears to be supported by reason: 'There


ii 129


736 Kannakatthala Sutta: Sutta 90


is no recluse or brahmin [128] who knows all, who sees all,
simultaneously; that is not possible."'

9. "There are these four castes, venerable sir: the nobles, the
brahmins, the merchants, and the workers. Is there any distinc-
tion or difference among them?"

"There are these four castes, great king: the nobles, the brah-
mins, the merchants, and the workers. Two of them, that is, the
nobles and the brahmins, are held to be superior since men pay
homage to them, rise up for them, and accord them reverential
salutation and polite services."

10. "Venerable sir, I was not asking about this present life; I
was asking about the life to come. 847 There are these four castes,
venerable sir: the nobles, the brahmins, the merchants, and the
workers. Is there any distinction or difference among them?"

"Great king, there are these five factors of striving. 848 What
five? Here a bhikkhu has faith, he places his faith in the
Tathagata's enlightenment thus: The Blessed One is accom-
plished, fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge and con-
duct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of per-
sons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened,
blessed.' Then he is free from illness and affliction, possessing a
good digestion that is neither too cool nor too warm but medi-
um and able to bear the strain of striving. Then he is honest and
sincere, and shows himself as he actually is to his teacher and
his companions in the holy life. Then he is energetic in abandon-
ing unwholesome states and in undertaking wholesome states,
steadfast, launching his effort with firmness and persevering in
cultivating wholesome states. Then he is wise; he possesses wis-
dom regarding rise and disappearance that is noble and pene-
trative and leads to the complete destruction of suffering. These
are the five factors of striving.

"There are these four castes, great king: the nobles, the brah-
mins, the merchants, and the workers. Now if they possessed
these five factors of striving, it would lead to their welfare and
happiness for a long time."

11. "Venerable sir, there are these four castes: the nobles, the
brahmins, the merchants, [129] and the workers. Now if they
possessed these five factors of striving, would there be any dif-
ference among them here in that respect?"


ii 130


At Kannakatthala 737


"Here, great king, I say that the difference among them would
lie in the diversity of their striving. Suppose there were two
tamable elephants or tamable horses or tamable oxen that were
well tamed and well disciplined, and two tamable elephants or
tamable horses or tamable oxen that were untamed and undisci-
plined. What do you think, great king? Would the two tamable
elephants or tamable horses or tamable oxen that were well
tamed and well disciplined, being tamed, acquire the behaviour
of the tamed, would they arrive at the grade of the tamed?"

"Yes, venerable sir."

"And would the two tamable elephants or tamable horses or
tamable oxen that were untamed and undisciplined, being
untamed, acquire the behaviour of the tamed, would they arrive
at the grade of the tamed, like the two elephants or horses or
oxen that were well tamed and well disciplined?"

"No, venerable sir."

"So too, great king, it is not possible that what can be achieved
by one who has faith, who is free from illness, who is honest and
sincere, who is energetic, and who is wise, can be achieved by
one who has no faith, who has much illness, who is fraudulent
and deceitful, who is lazy, and who is not wise."

12. "What the Blessed One has said appears reasonable, what
the Blessed One has said appears to be supported by reason.

"There are these four castes, venerable sir: the nobles, the brah-
mins, the merchants, and the workers. Now if they possessed
these five factors of striving, and if their striving was right,
would there be any difference among them in that respect?"

"Here, great king, in this respect I say that among them there
is no difference, that is, between the deliverance of one and the
deliverance of the others. Suppose a man took dry saka wood, lit
a fire, and produced heat; and then another man took dry sala
wood, lit a fire, and produced heat; [130] and then another man
took dry mango wood, lit a fire, and produced heat; and then
another man took dry fig wood, lit a fire, and produced heat.
What do you think, great king? Would there be any difference
among these fires lit with different kinds of wood, that is,
between the flame of one and the flames of the others, or
between the colour of one and the colours of the others, or
between the radiance of one and the radiances of the others?"



738 Kannakatthala Sutta: Sutta 90


ii 131


"No, venerable sir."

"So too, great king, when a fire is kindled by energy, lit by
striving, there is, I say, no difference, that is, between the deliv-
erance of one and the deliverance of the others."

13. "What the Blessed One has said appears reasonable, what
the Blessed One has said appears to be supported by reason.
But, venerable sir, how is it: are there gods?"

"Why do you ask that, great king?"

"Venerable sir, I was asking whether those gods come back to
this [human] state or whether they do not."

"Great king, those gods who are still subject to affliction come
back to this [human] state, those gods who are no longer subject
to affliction do not come back to this [human] state." 849

14. When this was said, General Vidudabha asked the Blessed
One: "Venerable sir, can those gods who are still subject to
affliction and who come back to this [human] state topple or
banish from that place those gods who are no longer subject to
affliction and who do not come back to this [human] state?"

Then the venerable Ananda thought: "This General Viduda-
bha is the son of King Pasenadi of Kosala, and I am the son of
the Blessed One. This is the time for one son to talk with the
other." He said to General Vidudabha: "General, I shall ask you
a question in return. Answer it as you choose. General, what do
you think? There is the whole extent of King Pasenadi of
Kosala's realm, where [131] he exercises lordship and sovereignty;
now can King Pasenadi of Kosala topple or banish from that
place any recluse or brahmin, irrespective of whether that
recluse or brahmin has merit or not and whether he leads the
holy life or not?"

"He can do so, sir."

"What do you think, general? There is the whole extent that is
not King Pasenadi of Kosala's realm, where he does not exercise
lordship and sovereignty; now can King Pasenadi of Kosala top-
ple or banish from that place any recluse or brahmin, irrespec-
tive of whether that recluse or brahmin has merit or not and
whether he leads the holy life or not?"

"He cannot do so, sir."

"General, what do you think? Have you heard of the gods of
the Thirty- three?"


ii 132


At Kannakatthala 739


"Yes, sir, I have heard of them. And King Pasenadi of Kosala
has heard of them too."

"General, what do you think? Can King Pasenadi of Kosala top-
ple the gods of the Thirty-three or banish them from that place?"

"Sir, King Pasenadi of Kosala cannot even see the gods of the
Thirty-three, so how could he topple them or banish them from
that place?"

"So too, general, those gods who are still subject to affliction
and who come back to this [human] state cannot even see those
gods who are no longer subject to affliction and who do not
come back to this [human] state; so how could they topple them
or banish them from that place?"

15. Then King Pasenadi of Kosala asked the Blessed One:
"Venerable sir, what is this bhikkhu's name?"

"His name is Ananda, great king."

"Ananda [joy] he is indeed, venerable sir, and Ananda he
appears. What [132] the venerable Ananda has said appears rea-
sonable, what he has said appears to be supported by reason.
But, venerable sir, how is it: are there Brahmas?"

"Why do you ask that, great king?"

"Venerable sir, I was asking whether those Brahmas come
back to this [human] state or whether they do not."

"Great king, any Brahma who is still subject to affliction
comes back to this [human] state, any Brahma who is no longer
subject to affliction does not come back to this [human] state."

16. Then a man announced to King Pasenadi of Kosala: "Great
king, Sanjaya, the brahmin of the Akasa clan, has come."

King Pasenadi of Kosala asked Sanjaya, the brahmin of the
Akasa clan: "Brahmin, who introduced this story to the palace?"

"Sire, it was General Vidudabha."

General Vidudabha said: "Sire, it was Sanjaya, the brahmin of
the Akasa clan."

17. Then a man announced to King Pasenadi of Kosala: "Sire,
it is time to depart."

King Pasenadi of Kosala said to the Blessed One: "Venerable
sir, we have asked the Blessed One about omniscience, and the
Blessed One has answered about omniscience; we approve of
and accept that answer, and so we are satisfied. We have asked
the Blessed One about purification in the four castes, and the


740 Kannakatthala Sutta: Sutta 90


ii 133


Blessed One has answered about purification in the four castes;
we approve of and accept that answer, and so we are satisfied.
We have asked the Blessed One about the gods, and the Blessed
One has answered about the gods; we approve of and accept
that answer, and so we are satisfied. We have asked the Blessed
One about the Brahmas, and the Blessed One has answered
about the Brahmas; we approve of and accept that answer, and
so we are satisfied. Whatever we asked the Blessed One, that the
Blessed One has answered; we approve of and accept those
answers, and so we are satisfied. [133] And now, venerable sir,
we depart. We are busy and have much to do."

"Now is the time, great king, to do as you think fit."

18. Then King Pasenadi of Kosala, having delighted and
rejoiced in the Blessed One's words, rose from his seat, and after
paying homage to the Blessed One, keeping him on his right, he
departed.


5

The Division on Brahmins

(B rahmanavagga )



91 Brahmayu Sutta
Brahmayu


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was
wandering in the country of the Videhans with a large Sangha
of bhikkhus, with five hundred bhikkhus.

2. Now on that occasion the brahmin Brahmayu was living at
Mithila. He was old, aged, burdened with years, advanced in
life, and come to the last stage; he was in his hundred and twen-
tieth year. He was a master of the Three Vedas with their vocab-
ularies, liturgy, phonology, and etymology, and the histories as
a fifth; skilled in philology and grammar, he was fully versed in
natural philosophy and in the marks of a Great Man. 850

3. The brahmin Brahmayu heard: "The recluse Gotama, the
son of the Sakyans who went forth from a Sakyan clan, has been
wandering in the country of the Videhans with a large Sangha
of bhikkhus, with five hundred bhikkhus. Now a good report of
Master Gotama has been spread to this effect: The Blessed One
is accomplished, fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge
and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of
persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened,
blessed. He declares this world with its gods, its Maras, and its
Brahmas, this generation with its recluses and brahmins, with its
princes and its people, which he has himself realised with direct
knowledge. He teaches the Dhamma that is good in the begin-
ning, good in the middle, and good in the end, with the right
meaning and phrasing, and he reveals a holy life that is utterly
perfect and pure.' Now it is good to see such arahants." [134]

4. Now at that time the brahmin Brahmayu had a young brah-
min student named Uttara who was a master of the Three
Vedas. . .fully versed in natural philosophy and in the marks of a
Great Man. He told his student: "My dear Uttara, the recluse
Gotama, the son of the Sakyans who went forth from a Sakyan


743


ii 135


744 Brahmayu Sutta: Sutta 91


clan, has been wandering in the country of the Videhans with a
large Sangha of bhikkhus, with five hundred bhikkhus...Now it
is good to see such arahants. Come, my dear Uttara, go to the
recluse Gotama and find out whether the report spread about him
is true or not, and whether Master Gotama is one such as this or
not. Thus we shall know about Master Gotama through you."

5. "But how shall I find out, sir, whether the report spread
about Master Gotama is true or not, and whether Master
Gotama is one such as this or not?"

"My dear Uttara, the thirty-two marks of a Great Man have
been handed down in our hymns, and the Great Man who is
endowed with them has only two possible destinies, no other. 851
If he lives the home life, he becomes a Wheel-turning Monarch,
a righteous king who rules by the Dhamma, master of the four
quarters, all-victorious, who has stabilised his country and pos-
sesses the seven treasures. He has these seven treasures: the
wheel-treasure, the elephant-treasure, the horse-treasure, the
jewel-treasure, the woman-treasure, the steward-treasure, and
the counsellor-treasure as the seventh. 852 His children, who
exceed a thousand, are brave and heroic, and crush the armies
of others; over this earth bounded by the ocean, he rules without
a rod, without a weapon, by means of the Dhamma. But if he
goes forth from the home life into homelessness, he becomes an
Accomplished One, a Fully Enlightened One, who draws aside
the veil in the world. 853 But I, my dear Uttara, am the giver of
the hymns; you are the receiver of them."

6. "Yes, sir," he replied. He rose from his seat, and after paying
homage to the brahmin Brahmayu, keeping him on his right, he
left for the country of the Videhans, where the Blessed One was
wandering. [135] Travelling by stages, he came to the Blessed
One and exchanged greetings with him. When this courteous
and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and
looked for the thirty-two marks of a Great Man on the Blessed
One's body. He saw, more or less, the thirty-two marks of a
Great Man on the Blessed One's body, except two; he was doubt-
ful and uncertain about two of the marks, and he could not
decide and make up his mind about them: about the male organ
being enclosed in a sheath and about the largeness of the tongue.

Then it occurred to the Blessed One: "This brahmin student
Uttara sees, more or less, the thirty-two marks of a Great Man


ii 136


Brahmayu 745


on me, except two; he is doubtful and uncertain about two of the
marks, and he cannot decide and make up his mind about them:
about the male organ being enclosed in a sheath and about the
largeness of the tongue."

7. Then the Blessed One worked such a feat of supernormal
power that the brahmin student Uttara saw that the Blessed
One's male organ was enclosed in a sheath. 854 Next the Blessed
One extruded his tongue, and he repeatedly touched both ear
holes and both nostrils, and he covered the whole of his fore-
head with his tongue.

8. Then the brahmin student Uttara thought: "The recluse
Gotama is endowed with the thirty-two marks of a Great Man.
Suppose I were to follow the recluse Gotama and observe his
behaviour?"

Then he followed the Blessed One for seven months like a
shadow, never leaving him. At the end of the seven months in
the country of the Videhans, he set out to journey to Mithila
where the brahmin Brahmayu was. When he arrived, he paid
homage to him and sat down at one side. Thereupon, the brah-
min Brahmayu asked him: "Well, my dear Uttara, is the report
that has been spread about Master Gotama [136] true or not?
And is Master Gotama one such as this or not?"

9. "The report that has been spread about Master Gotama is
true, sir, and not otherwise; and Master Gotama is one such as
this and not otherwise. He possesses the thirty-two marks of a
Great Man.

Master Gotama sets his foot down squarely - this is a mark of
a Great Man in Master Gotama.

On the soles of his feet there are wheels with a thousand
spokes and ribs and hubs all complete. . .

He has projecting heels ...

He has long fingers and toes. . .

His hands and feet are soft and tender. . .

He has netted hands and feet. . .

His feet are arched. . .

He has legs like an antelope's...

When he stands without stooping, the palms of both his hands
touch and rub against his knees. . .

His male organ is enclosed in a sheath. . .

He is the colour of gold, his skin has a golden sheen. . .


746 Brahmayu Sutta: Sutta 91 ii 137


He is fine-skinned, and because of the fineness of his skin,
dust and dirt do not stick on his body . . .

His body-hairs grow singly, each body-hair growing alone in
a hair socket. . .

The tips of his body-hairs turn up; the up- turned body-hairs
are blue-black, the colour of collyrium, curled and turned to
the right...

He has the straight limbs of a Brahma. . .

He has seven convexities. . . 85S

He has the torso of a lion...

The furrow between his shoulders is filled in. . .

He has the spread of a banyan tree; the span of his arms
equals the height of his body, and the height of his body equals
the span of his arms . . .

His neck and his shoulders are even. . .

His taste is supremely acute. . . 856

He is lion-jawed. . .[137]

He has forty teeth. . .

His teeth are even. . .

His teeth are without gaps. . .

His teeth are quite white. . .

He has a large tongue. . .

He has a divine voice, like the call of the Karavlka bird. . .

His eyes are deep blue...

He has the eyelashes of an ox.

He has hair growing in the space between his eyebrows,
which is white with the sheen of soft cotton. . .

His head is shaped like a turban - this is a mark of a Great
Man in Master Gotama. 857

Master Gotama is endowed with these thirty-two marks of a
Great Man.

10. "When he walks, he steps out with the right foot first. He
does not extend his foot too far or put it down too near. He
walks neither too quickly nor too slowly. He walks without his
knees knocking together. He walks without his ankles knocking
together. He walks without raising or lowering his thighs, or
bringing them together or keeping them apart. When he walks,
only the lower part of his body oscillates, and he does not walk
with bodily effort. When he turns to look, he does so with his
whole body. He does not look straight up; he does not look


ii 139


Brahmdyu 747


straight down. He does not walk looking about. He looks a
plough-yoke's length before him; beyond that he has unhin-
dered knowledge and vision.

11. "When he goes indoors, he does not raise or lower his
body, or bend it forward or back. [138] He turns round neither
too far from the seat nor too near it. He does not lean on the seat
with his hand. He does not throw his body onto the seat.

12. "When seated indoors, he does not fidget with his hands.
He does not fidget with his feet. He does not sit with his knees
crossed. He does not sit with his ankles crossed. He does not sit
with his hand holding his chin. When seated indoors he is not
afraid, he does not shiver and tremble, he is not nervous. Being
unafraid, not shivering or trembling or nervous, his hair does
not stand up and he is intent on seclusion.

13. "When he receives the water for the bowl, he does not
raise or lower the bowl or tip it forwards or backwards. He
receives neither too little nor too much water for the bowl. He
washes the bowl without making a splashing noise. He washes
the bowl without turning it round. He does not put the bowl on
the floor to wash his hands: when his hands are washed, the
bowl is washed; and when the bowl is washed, his hands are
washed. He pours the water for the bowl neither too far nor too
near and he does not pour it about.

14. "When he receives rice, he does not raise or lower the bowl
or tip it forwards or backwards. He receives neither too little
rice nor too much rice. He adds sauces in the right proportion;
he does not exceed the right amount of sauce in the mouthful.
He turns the mouthful over two or three times in his mouth and
then swallows it, and no rice kernel enters his body unchewed,
and no rice kernel remains in his mouth; then he takes another
mouthful. He takes his food experiencing the taste, though not
experiencing greed for the taste. The food he takes has eight fac-
tors: it is neither for amusement nor for intoxication nor for the
sake of physical beauty and attractiveness, but only for the
endurance and continuance of his body, for the ending of dis-
comfort, and for assisting the holy life; [139] he considers: "Thus
I shall terminate old feelings without arousing new feelings and
I shall be healthy and blameless and shall live in comfort.' 858

15. "When he has eaten and receives water for the bowl, he
does not raise or lower the bowl or tip it forwards or backwards.


748 BrahmSyu Sutta: Sutta 91


ii 140


He receives neither too little nor too much water for the bowl.
He washes the bowl without making a splashing noise. He
washes the bowl without turning it round. He does not put the
bowl on the floor to wash his hands: when his hands are
washed, the bowl is washed; and when the bowl is washed, his
hands are washed. He pours the water for the bowl neither too
far nor too near and he does not pour it about.

16. "When he has eaten, he puts the bowl on the floor neither
too far nor too near; and he is neither careless of the bowl nor
over-solicitous about it.

17. "When he has eaten, he sits in silence for a while, but he
does not let the time for the blessing go by. 859 When he has eaten
and gives the blessing, he does not do so criticising the meal or
expecting another meal; he instructs, urges, rouses, and encour-
ages that audience with talk purely on the Dhamma. When he
has done so, he rises from his seat and departs.

18. "He walks neither too fast nor too slow, and he does not
go as one who wants to get away.

19. "His robe is worn neither too high nor too low on his
body, nor too tight against his body, nor too loose on his body,
nor does the wind blow his robe away from his body. Dust and
dirt do not soil his body.

20. "When he has gone to the monastery, he sits down on a
seat made ready. Having sat down, he washes his feet, though
he does not concern himself with grooming' his feet. Having
washed his feet, he seats himself cross-legged, sets his body
erect, and establishes mindfulness in front of him. He does not
occupy his mind with self -affliction, or the affliction of others, or
the affliction of both; he sits with his mind set on his own wel-
fare, on the welfare of others, and on the welfare of both, even
on the welfare of the whole world. [140]

21. "When he has gone to the monastery, he teaches the
Dhamma to an audience. He neither flatters nor berates that
audience; he instructs, urges, rouses, and encourages it with talk
purely on the Dhamma. The speech that issues from his mouth
has eight qualities: it is distinct, intelligible, melodious, audible,
ringing, euphonious, deep, and sonorous. But while his voice is
intelligible as far as the audience extends, his speech does not
issue out beyond the audience. When the people have been
instructed, urged, roused, and encouraged by him, they rise


ii 141


Brahmayu 749


from their seats and depart looking only at him and concerned
with nothing else.

22. "We have seen Master Gotama walking, sir, we have seen
him standing, we have seen him entering indoors, we have seen
him indoors seated in silence after eating, we have seen him giv-
ing the blessing after eating, we have seen him going to the
monastery in silence, we have seen him in the monastery teach-
ing the Dhamma to an audience. Such is the Master Gotama;
such he is, and more than that." 860

23. When this was said, the brahmin Brahmayu rose from his
seat, and after arranging his upper robe on one shoulder, he
extended his hands in reverential salutation towards the Blessed
One and uttered this exclamation three times: "Honour to the
Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened! Honour to the
Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened! Honour to the
Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened! Perhaps
sometime or other we might meet Master Gotama, perhaps we
might have some conversation with him."

24. Then, in the course of his wandering, the Blessed One
eventually arrived at Mithila. There the Blessed One lived in
Makhadeva's Mango Grove. The brahmin householders of
Mithila heard: [141] "The recluse Gotama, the son of the
Sakyans who went forth from a Sakyan clan, has been wander-
ing in the country of the Videhans with a large Sangha of
bhikkhus, with five hundred bhikkhus, and he has now come to
Mithila and is living in Makhadeva's Mango Grove. Now a
good report of Master Gotama has been spread to this
effect . ..{as in §3 above )... Now it is good to see such arahants."

25. Then the brahmin householders of Mithila went to the
Blessed One. Some paid homage to the Blessed One and sat
down at one side; some exchanged greetings with him, and
when this courteous and amiable talk was finished, sat down at
one side; some extended their hands in reverential salutation
towards him and sat down at one side; some pronounced their
name and clan in the Blessed One's presence and sat down at
one side; some kept silent and sat down at one side.

26. The brahmin Brahmayu heard: "The recluse Gotama, the
son of the Sakyans who went forth from the Sakyan clan, has
arrived in Mithila and is living in Makhadeva's Mango Grove
in Mithila."


ii 143


750 Brahmayu Sutta: Sutta 91


Then the brahmin Brahmayu went to Makhadeva's Mango
Grove with a number of brahmin students. When he came to the
Mango Grove, he thought: "It is not proper that I should go to
the recluse Gotama without first being announced." Then he
addressed a certain brahmin student: "Come, brahmin student,
go to the recluse Gotama and ask in my name whether the
recluse Gotama is free from illness and affliction, and is healthy,
strong, and abiding in comfort, saying: 'Master Gotama, the
brahmin Brahmayu asks whether Master Gotama is free from
illness. ..abiding in comfort,' and say this: 'The brahmin
Brahmayu, Master Gotama, is old, aged, burdened with years,
advanced in life, and come to the last stage; he is in his hundred
and twentieth year. He is a master of the Three Vedas with their
vocabularies, liturgy, phonology, and etymology, and the histo-
ries as a fifth; skilled in philology and grammar, he is fully
versed in natural philosophy and in the marks of a Great Man.
Of all the brahmin householders who live in Mithila, the brah-
min Brahmayu is pronounced the foremost of them in wealth, in
knowledge of the hymns, and in age and fame. [142] He wants
to see Master Gotama.'"

"Yes, sir," the brahmin student replied. He went to the
Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him, and when this
courteous and amiable talk was finished, he stood at one side
and delivered his message. [The Blessed One said:]

"Now is the time for the brahmin Brahmayu to do as he
thinks fit."

27. Then the brahmin student went to the brahmin Brahmayu
and said: "Permission has been granted by the recluse Gotama.
Now is the time, sir, to do as you think fit."

So the brahmin Brahmayu went to the Blessed One. The
assembly saw him coming in the distance, and they at once
made way for him as for one who was well known and famous.
Then the brahmin Brahmayu said to the assembly: "Enough,
sirs, let each sit down in his own seat. I shall sit here next to the
recluse Gotama."

28. Then he went to the Blessed One and exchanged greetings
with him, and when this courteous and amiable talk was fin-
ished, he sat down at one side and looked for the thirty-two
marks of a Great Man on the Blessed One's body. [143] He saw,
more or less, the thirty-two marks of a Great Man on the Blessed


ii 143


Brahmayu 75 1


One's body, except two; he was doubtful about two of the
marks, and he could not decide and make up his mind about
them: about the male organ being enclosed in a sheath and
about the largeness of the tongue.

29. Then the brahmin Brahmayu addressed the Blessed One in
stanzas:

"The two-and-thirty marks I learned
That are the signs of a Great Man -
I still do not see two of these
Upon your body, Gotama.

Is what should be concealed by cloth
Hid in a sheath, greatest of men?

Though called by a word of feminine gender, 861
Perhaps your tongue is a manly one?

Perhaps your tongue is large as well.

According to what we have been taught?

Please put it out a little bit
And so, O Seer, cure our doubt
For welfare in this very life
And happiness in lives to come.

And now we crave for leave to ask
Something that we aspire to know."

30. Then it occurred to the Blessed One: "This brahmin
Brahmayu sees, more or less, the thirty-two marks of a Great
Man on me, except two; he is doubtful and uncertain about two
of the marks, and he cannot decide and make up his mind about
them: about the male organ being enclosed in a sheath and
about the largeness of the tongue."

Then the Blessed One worked such a feat of supernormal
power that the brahmin Brahmayu saw that the Blessed One's
male organ was enclosed in a sheath. Next the Blessed One
extruded his tongue, and he repeatedly touched both ear holes
and both nostrils, and he covered the whole of his forehead with
his tongue.

31. Then the Blessed One spoke these stanzas in reply to the
brahmin Brahmayu:


752 Brahmayu Sutta: Sutta 91


ii 144


"The two-and-thirty marks you learned
That are the signs of a Great Man -
All on my body can be found:

So, brahmin, doubt no more on that.

What must be known is directly known.

What must be developed has been developed.

What must be abandoned has been abandoned.

Therefore, brahmin, I am a Buddha. 862 [144]

For welfare in this very life
And happiness in lives to come.

Since leave is given you, please ask
Whatever you aspire to know."

32. Then the brahmin Brahmayu thought: "Permission has
been granted me by the recluse Gotama. Which should I ask him
about: good in this life or good in the lives to come?" Then he
thought: "I am skilled in the good of this life, and others too ask
me about good in this life. Why shouldn't I ask him only about
good in the lives to come?" Then he addressed the Blessed One
in stanzas:

"How does one become a brahmin?

And how does one attain to knowledge? 863
How has one the triple knowledge?

And how does one become a holy scholar?

How does one become an arahant?

And how does one attain completeness?

How is one a silent sage?

And how can one be called a Buddha?" 864

33. Then the Blessed One spoke these stanzas in reply:

"Who knows about his former lives,

Sees heaven and states of deprivation.

And has arrived at birth's destruction -
A sage who knows by direct knowledge.

Who knows his mind is purified.

Entirely freed from every lust.


ii 145


Brahmayu 753


Who has abandoned birth and death.

Who is complete in the holy life,

Who has transcended everything -
One such as this is called a Buddha." 865

34. When this was said, the brahmin Brahmayu rose from his
seat, and after arranging his upper robe on one shoulder, he
prostrated himself with his head at the Blessed One's feet, and
he covered the Blessed One's feet with kisses and caressed them
with his hands, pronouncing his name: "I am the brahmin
Brahmayu, Master Gotama; I am the brahmin Brahmayu, Master
Gotama."

35. Those in the assembly wondered and marvelled, and they
said: "It is wonderful, sirs, it is marvellous, what great power
and great might the recluse Gotama has, for the well-known and
famous brahmin Brahmayu to make such a display of humility!"

Then the Blessed One said to the brahmin Brahmayu: [145]
"Enough, brahmin, arise; sit down in your own seat since your
mind has confidence in me."

The brahmin Brahmayu then rose and sat down in his own seat.

36. The Blessed One then gave him progressive instruction, 866
that is, talk on giving, talk on virtue, talk on the heavens; he
explained the danger, degradation, and defilement in sensual
pleasures and the blessing of renunciation. When he knew that
the brahmin Brahmayu's mind was ready, receptive, free from
hindrances, elated, and confident, he expounded to him the
teaching special to the Buddhas: suffering, its origin, its cessa-
tion, and the path. Just as a clean cloth with all marks removed
would take dye evenly, so too, while the brahmin Brahmayu sat
there, the spotless immaculate vision of the Dhamma arose in
him: "All that is subject to arising is subject to cessation." Then -
the brahmin Brahmayu saw the Dhamma, attained the
Dhamma, understood the Dhamma, fathomed the Dhamma; he
crossed beyond doubt, did away with perplexity, gained intre-
pidity, and became independent of others in the Teacher's
Dispensation.

37. Then he said to the Blessed One: "Magnificent, Master
Gotama! Magnificent, Master Gotama! Master Gotama has made
the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning
upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden.


754 Brahmayu Sutta: Sutta 91


ii 146


showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in
the dark for those with eyesight to see forms. I go to Master
Gotama for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of
bhikkhus. From today let Master Gotama remember me as a lay
follower who has gone to him for refuge for life. Let the Blessed
One, together with the Sangha of bhikkhus, consent to accept
tomorrow's meal from me."

The Blessed One consented in silence. Then, knowing that the
Blessed One had consented, the brahmin Brahmayu rose from
his seat, and after paying homage to the Blessed One, keeping
him on his right, he departed.

38. Then, when the night had ended, the brahmin Brahmayu
had good food of various kinds prepared in his residence, and
he had the time announced to the Blessed One: "It is time.
Master Gotama, the meal is ready." [146]

Then, it being morning, the Blessed One dressed, and taking
his bowl and outer robe, he went with the Sangha of bhikkhus
to the brahmin Brahmayu' s residence and sat down on the seat
made ready. Then, for a week, with his own hands, the brahmin
Brahmayu served and satisfied the Sangha of bhikkhus headed
by the Buddha with various kinds of good food.

39. At the end of that week, the Blessed One set out to wander
in the country of the Videhans. Soon after he had gone, the brah-
min Brahmayu died. Then a number of bhikkhus went to the
Blessed One, and after paying homage to him, they sat down at
one side and said: "Venerable sir, the brahmin Brahmayu has
died. What is his destination? What is his future course?"

"Bhikkhus, the brahmin Brahmayu was wise, he entered into
the way of the Dhamma, and he did not trouble me in the inter-
pretation of the Dhamma. With the destruction of the five lower
fetters, he has reappeared spontaneously [in the Pure Abodes]
and will there attain final Nibbana, without ever returning from
that world."

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


92 Sela Sutta
To Sela


1. Thus have I heard . 867 On one occasion the Blessed One was
wandering in the country of the Anguttarapans with a large
Sangha of bhikkhus, [102] with twelve hundred and fifty
bhikkhus, and eventually he arrived at a town of the
Anguttarapans named Apana.

2. The matted-hair ascetic Keniya heard: "The recluse Gotama,
the son of the Sakyans who went forth from a Sakyan clan, has
been wandering in the country of the Anguttarapans with a
large Sangha of bhikkhus, with twelve hundred and fifty [103]
bhikkhus, and he has come to Apana. Now a good report of
Master Gotama has been spread to this effect... (as Sutta 91,
§3). . .Now it is good to see such arahants."

3. Then the matted-hair ascetic Keniya went to the Blessed
One and exchanged greetings with him, and when this courte-
ous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side. The
Blessed One instructed, urged, roused, and encouraged him
with a talk on the Dhamma. Then, having been instructed,
urged, roused, and encouraged by the Blessed One with a talk
on the Dhamma, the matted-hair ascetic Keniya said to the
Blessed One: "Let Master Gotama together with the Sangha of
bhikkhus consent to accept tomorrow's meal from me."

When this was said, the Blessed One told him: "The Sangha
of bhikkhus is large, Keniya, [104] consisting of twelve hun-
dred and fifty bhikkhus, and you place full confidence in the
brahmins."

A second time the matted-hair ascetic Keniya said to the
Blessed One: "Although the Sangha of bhikkhus is large. Master
Gotama, consisting of twelve hundred and fifty bhikkhus, and
although I place full confidence in the brahmins, still let Master
Gotama, together with the Sangha of bhikkhus, consent to


755


756 Sela Sutta: Sutta 92


Sn 105



accept tomorrow's meal from me." A second time the Blessed
One told him: "The Sangha of bhikkhus is large, Keniya..."

A third time the matted-hair ascetic Keniya said to the Blessed
One: "Although the Sangha is large. Master Gotama... still let
Master Gotama together with the Sangha of bhikkhus consent to
accept tomorrow's meal from me." The Blessed One consented
in silence.

4. Then, knowing that the Blessed One had consented, the
matted-hair ascetic Keniya rose from his seat and went to his
own hermitage where he addressed his friends and companions,
his kinsmen and relatives thus: "Hear me, sirs, my friends and
companions, my kinsmen and relatives. The recluse Gotama has
been invited by me for tomorrow's meal together with the
Sangha of bhikkhus. Make the necessary purchases and prepa-
rations for me."

"Yes, sir," they replied, and some dug out ovens, some
chopped wood, some washed dishes, some set out water jugs,
some prepared seats, while the matted-hair ascetic Keniya him-
self set up a pavilion.

5. Now on that occasion the brahmin Sela was staying at
Apana. [105] He was a master of the Three Vedas with their
vocabularies, liturgy, phonology, and etymology, and the histo-
ries as a fifth; skilled in philology and grammar, he was fully
versed in natural philosophy and in the marks of a Great Man,
and was teaching the recitation of the hymns to three hundred
brahmin students. «•

6. At the time the matted-hair ascetic Keniya had placed full
confidence in the brahmin Sela. Then the brahmin Sela, while
walking and wandering for exercise attended by his three hun-
dred brahmin students, came to the matted-hair ascetic Keniya's
hermitage. There he saw some men digging out ovens, some
chopping wood, some washing dishes, some setting out water
jugs, some preparing seats, while the matted-hair ascetic Keniya
himself was setting up a pavilion.

7. When he saw this, he asked the matted-hair ascetic Keniya:
"What, is Master Keniya to hold a marriage or a giving in mar-
riage? Or is there some great sacrifice? Or has King Seniya
Bimbisara of Magadha been invited with a large retinue for
tomorrow's meal?"

8. "I will not be holding a marriage or a giving in marriage.
Master Sela, nor has King Seniya Bimbisara of Magadha been



Sn 107


To Sela 757


invited with a large retinue for tomorrow's meal, but I am plan-
ning a great sacrifice. The recluse Gotama, the son of the
Sakyans who went forth from a Sakyan clan, has been wander-
ing in the country of the Anguttarapans with a large Sangha of
bhikkhus, with twelve hundred and fifty bhikkhus, and has
come to Apana. [106] Now a good report of Master Gotama has
been spread to this effect: 'That Blessed One is accomplished,
fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge and conduct, sub-
lime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of persons to be
tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened [buddha],
blessed.' He has been invited by me for tomorrow's meal together
with the Sangha of bhikkhus."

9. "Did you say 'Buddha,' Keniya?"

"I said 'Buddha,' Sela."

"Did you say 'Buddha,' Keniya?"

"I said 'Buddha,' Sela."

10. Then it occurred to the brahmin Sela: "Even this word
'Buddha' is hard to come across in this world. Now the thirty-
two marks of a Great Man have been handed down in our
hymns, and the Great Man who is endowed with them has only
two possible destinies, no other. If he lives the home life he
becomes a Wheel-turning Monarch, a righteous king who rules
by the Dhamma, master of the four quarters, all-victorious, who
has stabilised his country and possesses the seven treasures. He
has these seven treasures: the wheel-treasure, the elephant-
treasure, the horse-treasure, the jewel-treasure, the woman-
treasure, the steward-treasure, and the counsellor-treasure as
the seventh. His children, who exceed a thousand, are brave and
heroic and crush the armies of others; over this earth bounded
by the ocean he rules without a rod, without a weapon, by
means of the Dhamma. But if he goes forth from the home life
into homelessness, he becomes an Accomplished One, a Fully
Enlightened One, who draws aside the veil in the world."

11. [He said]: "My good Keniya, where is Master Gotama, the
Accomplished One, the Fully Enlightened One, now living?"

When this was said, the matted-hair ascetic Keniya extended
his right arm and said: [107] "There, where that green line of the
grove is. Master Sela."

12. Then the brahmin Sela went with the three hundred brah-
min students to the Blessed One. He addressed the brahmin stu-
dents: "Come quietly, sirs, tread carefully; for these Blessed


758 Sela Sutta: Sutta 92


Sn 108


Ones are difficult to approach, they wander alone like lions.
When I am speaking with the recluse Gotama, do not break in
and interrupt me, but wait until our talk is finished."

13. Then the brahmin Sela went to the Blessed One and
exchanged greetings with him. When this courteous and ami-
able talk was finished, he sat down at one side and looked for
the thirty-two marks of a Great Man on the Blessed One's body.
He saw, more or less, the thirty-two marks of a Great Man on
the Blessed One's body, except two; he was doubtful and uncer-
tain about two of the marks, and he could not decide and make
up his mind about them: about the male organ being enclosed in
a sheath and about the largeness of the tongue.

Then it occurred to the Blessed One: "This brahmin Sela sees
the thirty-two marks of a Great Man on me, except two; he is
doubtful and uncertain about two of the marks, and he cannot
decide and make up his mind about them: about the male organ
being enclosed in a sheath and about the largeness of the tongue."

14. Then the Blessed One worked such a feat of supernormal
power that the brahmin Sela saw that the Blessed One's male
organ was enclosed in a sheath. [108] Next the Blessed One
extruded his tongue, and he repeatedly touched both ear holes
and both nostrils, and he covered the whole of his forehead with
his tongue.

15. Then the brahmin Sela thought: "The recluse Gotama is
endowed with the thirty-two marks of a Great Man; they are
complete, not incomplete. But I do not know whether he is a
Buddha or not. However, I have heard from elder aged brah-
mins who speak according to the lineage of teachers that those
who are the Accomplished Ones, Fully Enlightened Ones, reveal
themselves as such when their praise is spoken. Suppose I extol
the recluse Gotama to his face with fitting stanzas."

Then he extolled the Blessed One to his face with fitting stanzas:

16. Sela

"O perfect in body, well favoured.

Well fashioned and lovely to behold;

O Blessed One, golden is your colour.

And white your teeth; you are strong.

The features are seen one and all
That distinguish a man as well born;


Sn 109


To Sela 759


They are all to be found on your body.

These marks that reveal a Great Man.

With eyes clear, with countenance bright.

Majestic, erect as a flame,

In the midst of this body of recluses
You shine like the blazing sun.

A bhikkhu so lovely to look on
With skin of so golden a sheen -
With beauty so rare why should you
Be content with the life of a recluse?

You are fit to be a king, a lord of chariots,

A monarch who makes the wheel turn,

A victor in all the four quarters

And lord of the Jambu-tree Grove. 868 [109]

With warriors and great princes
All devoted to your service,

0 Gotama, you should reign

As ruler of men, king above all kings."

17. Buddha

"l am already a king, O Sela,"
the Blessed One replied.

"I am supreme king of the Dhamma,

1 make the Wheel of Dhamma revolve.

The wheel that none can stop."

18. Sela

"You claim full enlightenment," the brahmin Sela said,
"You tell me, O Gotama,

'I am supreme king of the Dhamma,

I make the Wheel of Dhamma revolve.'

Who is your general, that disciple
Who follows in the Master's own way?

Who is it who helps you to turn
The wheel set in motion by you?"

19. Buddha

"The wheel set in motion by me,"

The Blessed One replied.




"That same supreme Wheel of Dhamma,
Sariputta the Tathagata's son
Helps me in turning this wheel.

What must be known is directly known.

What must be developed has been developed.
What must be abandoned has been abandoned.
Therefore, brahmin, I am a Buddha.

So let your doubts about me cease
And let decision take their place,

For it is always hard to gain
Sight of the Enlightened Ones. [110]

I am the one whose presence in the world
Is very rarely come upon,

I am the Fully Enlightened One,

I, O brahmin, am the supreme physician.

I am the holy one beyond compare

Who has crushed all Mara's teeming hordes;

Having defeated all my enemies,

I rejoice free from fear."

20. Sela

"O sirs, hear this, hear what he says,

The man of vision, the physician.

The mighty hero who roars
Like a lion in the forest.

Who, even though of outcast birth.

Would not believe him when he saw
That he is the holy one beyond compare
Who has crushed all Mara's teeming hordes?

Now let him follow me who wants
And who wants not, let him depart.

For I will go forth under him.

This man of lofty wisdom."


Sn 111


To Sela 761


21. Pupils

"If, O sir, you now approve
This teaching of the Enlightened One,

We too will go forth under him.

This man of lofty wisdom."

22. Sela

"There are three hundred brahmins here
Who with uplifted hands implore:

'O may we live the holy life
Under you, O Blessed One.'"

23. Buddha

"The holy life is well proclaimed,

O Sela," said the Blessed One,

"To be seen here and not delayed;

One who trains with diligence
Will find a fruitful going forth."

24. Then the brahmin Sela and his assembly received the going
forth under the Blessed One, and they received the full admission.

25. Then, when the night had ended, the matted-hair ascetic
Keniya had good food of various kinds prepared in his own her-
mitage [HI] and had the time announced to the Blessed One: "It
is time. Master Gotama, the meal is ready." Then, it being morn-
ing, the Blessed One dressed, and taking his bowl and outer
robe, he went with the Sangha of bhikkhus to the hermitage of
the matted-hair ascetic Keniya and sat down on the seat made
ready. Then, with his own hands, the matted-hair ascetic Keniya
served and satisfied the Sangha of bhikkhus headed by the
Buddha with various kinds of good food. When the Blessed One
had eaten and had withdrawn his hand from the bowl, the
matted-hair ascetic Keniya took a low seat and sat down on one
side. Thereupon the Blessed One gave him his blessing with
these stanzas:

26. "Burnt offerings are the glory of fires,

Savitri the glory of Vedic hymns.

Glory of human beings, a king.

Glory of flowing rivers, the sea;


762 Sela Sutta: Sutta 92


Sn 112


The moon is the glory of the stars,

The sun is the glory of all that shine;

Merit is the glory of all who aspire;

The Sangha, glory of those who give,"

When the Blessed One had given his blessing with these stan-
zas, he rose from his seat and departed.

27. Then, not long after their full admission, dwelling alone,
withdrawn, diligent, ardent, and resolute, the venerable Sela
and his assembly, [112] by realising for themselves with direct
knowledge, here and now entered upon and abided in that
supreme goal of the holy life for the sake of which clansmen
rightly go forth from the home life into homelessness. They
directly knew: "Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived,
what had to be done has been done, there is no more coming to
any state of being." And the venerable Sela together with his
assembly became arahants.

28. Then the venerable Sela together with his assembly went
to the Blessed One. Having arranged his upper robe on one
shoulder, extending his hands in reverential greeting towards
the Blessed One, he addressed him with these stanzas:

"Eight days have passed, All-Seeing One,

Since we went to you for refuge.

In these seven nights, O Blessed One,

We have been tamed in your teaching.

You are the Buddha, you are the Teacher,

You are the Sage, the conqueror of Mara.

Having cut off all evil tendencies.

You have crossed and guide humanity across.

You have surmounted all attachments.

You have removed all the taints.

You are a lion free from clinging.

You have abandoned fear and dread.

Here these three hundred bhikkhus stand
With hands held out in adoration.

O Hero, extend your feet.

And let these great beings worship the Teacher."


93 Assalayana Sutta
To Assalayana


[147] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One
was living at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.

2. Now at that time five hundred brahmins from diverse
provinces were staying at SavatthI for some business or other.
Then those brahmins thought: "This recluse Gotama describes
purification for all the four castes. 869 Who is there able to dis-
pute with him about this assertion?"

3. Now on that occasion a brahmin student named Assalayana
was staying at SavatthI. Young, shaven-headed, sixteen years
old, he was a master of the Three Vedas with their vocabularies,
liturgy, phonology, and etymology, and the histories as a fifth;
skilled in philology and grammar, he was fully versed in natural
philosophy and in the marks of a Great Man. Then the brahmins
thought: "There is this young brahmin student named Assa-
layana staying at SavatthI. Young. ..fully versed in natural philos-
ophy and in the marks of a Great Man. He will be able to dispute
with the recluse Gotama about this assertion."

4. So the brahmins went to the brahmin student Assalayana
and said to him: "Master Assalayana, this recluse Gotama
describes purification for all the four castes. Let Master Assa-
layana come and dispute with the recluse Gotama about this
assertion."

When this was said, the brahmin student Assalayana replied:
"Sirs, the recluse Gotama is one who speaks the Dhamma.
Now those who speak the Dhamma are difficult to dispute
with. I am not able to dispute with the recluse Gotama about
this assertion."

A second time the brahmins said to him: "Master Assalayana,
this recluse Gotama describes purification for all the four castes.
Let Master Assalayana come [148] and dispute with the recluse


763


764 Assalayana Sutta: Sutta 93


ii 149


Gotama about this assertion. For the training of a wanderer has
been completed by Master Assalayana." 870

For the second time the brahmin student Assalayana replied:
"Sirs, the recluse Gotama is one who speaks the Dhamma. Now
those who speak the Dhamma are difficult to dispute with. I am
not able to dispute with the recluse Gotama about this assertion."

A third time the brahmins said to him: "Master Assalayana,
this recluse Gotama describes purification for all the four
castes. Let Master Assalayana come and dispute with the
recluse Gotama about this assertion. For the training of a wan-
derer has been completed by Master Assalayana. Let not the
Master Assalayana be defeated without having even fought the
battle."

When this was said, the brahmin student Assalayana replied:
"Sirs, the recluse Gotama is one who speaks the Dhamma. Now
those who speak the Dhamma are difficult to dispute with. I am
not able to dispute with the recluse Gotama about this assertion.
Still, sirs, at your bidding I will go."

5. Then the brahmin student Assalayana went with a large
number of brahmins to the Blessed One and exchanged greetings
with him. When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he
sat down at one side and said to the Blessed One: "Master
Gotama, the brahmins say thus: 'Brahmins are the highest caste,
those of any other caste are inferior; brahmins are the fairest
caste, those of any other caste are dark; only brahmins are puri-
fied, not non-brahmins; ^brahmins alone are the sons of Brahma,
the offspring of Brahma, bom of his mouth, born of Brahma, cre-
ated by Brahma, heirs of Brahma.' What does Master Gotama
say about that?"

"Now, Assalayana, the brahmin women are seen having their
periods, becoming pregnant, giving birth, and giving suck. 871
And yet those who are born from the wombs of the brahmin
women say thus: 'Brahmins are the highest caste... brahmins
alone are the sons of Brahma, the offspring of Brahma, born of
his mouth, born of Brahma, created by Brahma, heirs of
Brahma.'" [149]

6. "Although Master Gotama says this, still the brahmins think
thus: 'Brahmins are the highest caste. . .heirs of Brahma.'"

"What do you think, Assalayana? Have you heard that in
Yona and Kamboja 872 and in other outland countries there are


ii 150


To Assalayana 765


only two castes, masters and slaves, and that masters become
slaves and slaves masters?"

"So I have heard, sir."

"Then on the strength of what [argument] or with the support
of what [authority] do the brahmins in this case say thus:
'Brahmins are the highest caste. . .heirs of Brahma'?"

7. "Although Master Gotama says this, still the brahmins think
thus: 'Brahmins are the highest caste. . .heirs of Brahma.'"

"What do you think, Assalayana? 873 Suppose a noble were to
kill living beings, take what is not given, misconduct himself in
sensual pleasures, speak falsely, speak maliciously, speak harshly,
gossip, be covetous, have a mind of ill will, and hold wrong view.
On the dissolution of the body, after death, would only he [be
likely to] reappear in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy desti-
nation, in perdition, even in hell - and not a brahmin? Suppose a
merchant... a worker were to kill living beings... and hold wrong
view. On the dissolution of the body after death, would only he
[be likely to] reappear in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy
destination, in perdition, even in hell - and not a brahmin?"

"No, Master Gotama. Whether it be a noble, or a brahmin, or a
merchant, or a worker - those of all four castes who kill living
beings [150]... and hold wrong view, on the dissolution of the
body, after death, [are likely to] reappear in a state of depriva-
tion, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell."

"Then on the strength of what [argument] or with the support
of what [authority] do the brahmins in this case say thus:
'Brahmins are the highest caste., .heirs of Brahma'?"

8. "Although Master Gotama says this, still the brahmins think
thus: 'Brahmins are the highest caste. . .heirs of Brahma.'"

"What do you think, Assalayana? Suppose a brahmin were to
abstain from killing living beings, from taking what is not given,
from misconduct in sensual pleasures, from false speech, from
malicious speech, from harsh speech, and from gossip, and were
to be uncovetous, to have a mind without ill will, and to hold
right view. On the dissolution of the body, after death, would
only he [be likely to] reappear in a happy destination, even in the
heavenly world - and not a noble, or a merchant, or a worker?"

"No, Master Gotama. Whether it be a noble, or a brahmin, or a
merchant, or a worker - those of all four castes who abstain


766 Assalayana Siitta: Sutta 93


ii 152


from killing living beings... and hold right view, on the dissolu-
tion of the body, after death, [are likely to] reappear in a happy
destination, even in the heavenly world."

"Then on the strength of what [argument] or with the support
of what [authority] do the brahmins in this case say thus:
'Brahmins are the highest caste. . .heirs of Brahma'?"

9. "Although Master Gotama says this, [151] still the brahmins
think thus: 'Brahmins are the highest caste. . .heirs of Brahma.'"

"What do you think, Assalayana? Is only a brahmin capable of
developing a mind of loving-kindness towards a certain region,
without hostility and without ill will, and not a noble, or a mer-
chant, or a worker?"

"No, Master Gotama. Whether it be a noble, or a brahmin, or a
merchant, or a worker - those of all four castes are capable of
developing a mind of loving-kindness towards a certain region,
without hostility and without ill will."

"Then on the strength of what [argument] or with the support
of what [authority] do the brahmins in this case say thus:
'Brahmins are the highest caste. . .heirs of Brahma'?"

10. "Although Master Gotama says this, still the brahmins
think thus: 'Brahmins are the highest caste. . .heirs of Brahma.'"

"What do you think, Assalayana? Is only a brahmin capable of
taking a loofah and bath powder, going to the river, and washing
off dust and dirt, and not a noble, or a merchant, or a worker?"

"No, Master Gotama. Whether it be a noble, or a brahmin, or a
merchant, or a worker - those of all four castes are capable of
taking a loofah and bath powder, going to the river, and wash-
ing off dust and dirt."

"Then on the strength of what [argument] or with the support
of what [authority] do the brahmins in this case say thus: 'Brah-
mins are the highest caste. . .heirs of Brahma'?"

11. "Although Master Gotama says this, still the brahmins
think thus: 'Brahmins are the highest caste... heirs of Brahma.'"

"What do you think, Assalayana? [152] Suppose a head-
anointed noble king were to assemble here a hundred men of
different birth and say to them: 'Come, sirs, let any here who
have been born into a noble clan or a brahmin clan or a royal
clan take an upper fire-stick of sala wood, salala wood, sandal-
wood, or padumaka wood and light a fire and produce heat.
And also let any who have been born into an outcast clan, a


1


ii 153 To Assalayana 767

trapper clan, a wicker workers' clan, a cartwrights' clan, or a
scavengers' clan take an upper fire-stick made from a dog's
drinking trough, from a pig's trough, from a dustbin, or from
castor-oil wood and light a fire and produce heat.'

"What do you think, Assalayana? When a fire is lit and heat is
produced by someone in the first group, would that fire have a
flame, a colour, and a radiance, and would it be possible to use
it for the purposes of fire, while when a fire is lit and heat is pro-
duced by someone of the second group, that fire would have no
flame, no colour, and no radiance, and it would not be possible
to use it for the purposes of fire?"

"No, Master Gotama. When a fire is lit and heat is produced by
someone in the first group, that fire would have a flame, a
colour, and a radiance, and it would be possible to use it for the
purposes of fire. And when a fire is lit and heat is produced by
someone of the second group, that fire too would have a flame, a
colour, and a radiance, and it would be possible to use it for the
purposes of fire. For all fire has a flame, [153] a colour, and a
radiance, and it is possible to use all fire for the purposes of fire."

"Then on the strength of what [argument] or with the support
of what [authority] do the brahmins in this case say thus:
'Brahmins are the highest caste. . .heirs of Brahma'?"

12. "Although Master Gotama says this, still the brahmins
think thus: 'Brahmins are the highest caste. . .heirs of Brahma.'"

"What do you think, Assalayana? Suppose a noble youth
were to cohabit with a brahmin girl, and a son was bom from
their cohabitation. Should a son bom from a noble youth and a
brahmin girl be called a noble after the father or a brahmin after
the mother?"

"He could be called both, Master Gotama."

13. "What do you think, Assalayana? Suppose a brahmin
youth here were to cohabit with a noble girl, and a son were to
be born from their cohabitation. Should the son born from a
brahmin youth and a noble girl be called a noble after the mother
or a brahmin after the father?"

"He could be called both. Master Gotama."

14. "What do you think, Assalayana? Suppose a mare were to
be mated with a male donkey, and a foal were to be born as the
result. Should the foal be called a horse after the mother or a
donkey after the father?"


768 Assalayana Sutta: Sutta 93 ii 155

"It is a mule. Master Gotama, since it does not belong to either
kind. [154] I see the difference in this last case, but I see no dif-
ference in either of the former cases."

15. "What do you think, Assalayana? Suppose there were two
brahmin students who were brothers, bom of the same mother,
one studious and acute, and one neither studious nor acute.
Which of them would brahmins feed first at a funeral feast, or at
a ceremonial milk-rice offering, or at a sacrificial feast, or at a
feast for guests?"

"On such occasions, brahmins would feed first the one who
was studious and acute. Master Gotama; for how could what is
given to one who is neither studious nor acute bring great fruit?"

16. "What do you think, Assalayana? Suppose there were two
brahmin students who were brothers, born of the same mother,
one studious and acute, but immoral and of bad character, and
one neither studious nor acute, but virtuous and of good charac-
ter. Which of them would brahmins feed first at a funeral feast,
or at a ceremonial milk-rice offering, or at a sacrificial feast, or at
a feast for guests?"

"On such occasions, brahmins would feed first the one who
was neither studious nor acute, but virtuous and of good char-
acter, Master Gotama; for how could what is given to one who is
immoral and of bad character bring great fruit?"

17. "First, Assalayana, you took your stand on birth, and after
that you took your stand on scriptural learning, and after that
you have come to take your stand on the very ground that
purification is for all four castes, as I describe it."

When this was said, the brahmin student Assalayana sat silent
and dismayed, with shoulders drooping and head down, glum,
and without response. Knowing this, the Blessed One said to him:

18. "Once, Assalayana, when seven brahmin seers were
dwelling in leaf huts in the forest, this pernicious view arose in
them: 'Brahmins are the highest caste.. .[155]. ..heirs of Brahma.'
Now the seer Devala the Dark heard this. 874 Then he arranged
his hair and beard, dressed in ochre-coloured garments, put on
stout sandals, and taking a staff made of gold, he appeared in
the courtyard of the seven brahmin seers. Then, while walking
up and down the courtyard of the seven brahmin seers, the seer
Devala the Dark spoke thus: 'Where have those worthy brahmin


ii 157


To Assalayana 769


seers gone? Where have those worthy brahmin seers gone?'
Then the seven brahmin seers thought: 'Who is walking up and
down in the courtyard of the seven brahmin seers like a village
lout speaking thus: "Where have those worthy brahmin seers
gone? Where have those worthy brahmin seers gone?" Let us
curse him!' Then the seven brahmin seers cursed the seer Devala
the Dark thus: 'Be ashes, vile one! Be ashes, vile one!' But the
more the seven brahmin seers cursed him, the more comely,
beautiful, and handsome the seer Devala the Dark became. Then
the seven brahmin seers thought: 'Our asceticism is in vain, our
holy life is fruitless; for formerly when we cursed anyone thus:
"Be ashes, vile one! Be ashes, vile one!" he always became ashes;
but the more we curse this one, the more comely, beautiful, and
handsome he becomes.'

"'Your asceticism is not in vain, sirs, your holy life is not fruit-
less. But, sirs, put away your hatred towards me.' [156]

"'We have put away our hatred towards you, sir. Who are you?'

"'Have you heard of the seer Devala the Dark, sirs?' - 'Yes,
sir.' - 1 am he, sirs.'

"Then the seven brahmin seers went to the seer Devala the
Dark and paid homage to him. Then he said to them: 'Sirs, I
heard that while the seven brahmin seers were dwelling in leaf
huts in the forest, this pernicious view arose in them: "Brahmins
are the highest caste. . .heirs of Brahma."' - 'That is so, sir.'

"'But, sirs, do you know if the mother who bore you went
only with a brahmin and never with a non-brahmin?' - 'No, sir.'

"'But, sirs, do you know if your mother's mothers back to the
seventh generation went only with brahmins and never with
non-brahmins?' - 'No, sir.'

"'But, sirs, do you know if the father who begot you went only
with a brahmin woman and never with a non-brahmin woman?'
- 'No, sir.'

"'But, sirs, do you know if your father's fathers back to the
seventh generation went only with brahmin women and never
with non-brahmin women?' - 'No, sir.'

"'But, sirs, do you know how the conception of an embryo in a
womb comes about?'

"'Sir, we know how the conception of an embryo in a womb
comes about. [157] Here, there is a union of the mother and


ii 157


770 Assalayana Sutta: Suita 93


father, and it is the mother's season, and the being to be reborn
is present. Thus the conception of an embryo in a womb comes
about through the union of these three tilings.' 875

"'Then, sirs, do you know for sure whether that being to be
reborn is a noble, or a brahmin, or a merchant, or a worker?'

"'Sir, we do not know for sure whether that being to be reborn
is a noble, or a brahmin, or a merchant, or a worker.'

"'That being so, sirs, then what are you?'

"'That being so, sir, we do not know what we are.'

"Now, Assalayana, even those seven brahmin seers, on being
pressed and questioned and cross-questioned by the seer Devala
the Dark on their own assertion about birth, were unable to sup-
port it. But how shall you, on being pressed and questioned and
cross-questioned by me now on your assertion about birth, be
able to support it? You, who rely on the teachers' doctrines, are
not [even fit to be] their spoon-holder Punna." 876

19. When this was said, the brahmin student Assalayana said
to the Blessed One: "Magnificent, Master Gotama! Magnificent,
Master Gotama!. ..(as Sutta 91, §37 ). ..From today let Master
Gotama remember me as a lay follower who has gone to him for
refuge for life."


94 Ghotamukha Sutta
To Ghotamukha


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the venerable Udena was
living at Benares in the Khemiya Mango Grove.

2. Now on that occasion the brahmin Ghotamukha had
arrived in Benares for some business or other. As he was [158]
walking and wandering for exercise, he came to the Khemiya
Mango Grove. At the time the venerable Udena was walking up
and down in the open. Then the brahmin Ghotamukha went up
to the venerable Udena and exchanged greetings with him.
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, still walking
up and down with the venerable Udena, he said this: "Worthy
recluse, there is no wanderers' life that accords with the
Dhamma: so it seems to me here, and that may be because I
have not seen such venerable ones as yourself or [because I have
not seen] the Dhamma here."

3. When this was said, the venerable Udena stepped down
from the walk and went into his dwelling, where he sat down
on a seat made ready. 877 And Ghotamukha too stepped down
from the walk and went into the dwelling, where he stood at
one side. Then the venerable Udena said to him: "There are
seats, brahmin, sit down if you wish."

"We did not sit down because we were waiting for Master
Udena [to speak]. For how could one like myself presume to sit
down on a seat without first being invited to do so?"

4. Then the brahmin Ghotamukha took a low seat, sat down at
one side, and said to the venerable Udena: "Worthy recluse, there
is no wanderers' life that accords with the Dhamma: so it seems to
me here, and that may be because I have not seen such venerable
ones as yourself or [because I have not seen] the Dhamma here."

"Brahmin, if you think any statement of mine is to be agreed
with, then agree with it; if you think any statement of mine is to


771


772 Ghotamukha Sutta: Sutta 94


ii 160


be argued against, then argue against it; and if you do not
understand the meaning of any statement of mine, ask me to
clarify it thus: 'How is this, Master Udena? What is the meaning
of this?' In this way we can discuss this matter."

"Master Udena, if I think any statement of Master Udena's is
to be agreed with, I shall agree with it; if I think any statement of
his is to be argued against, I shall argue against it; and if I [159]
do not understand the meaning of any statement of Master
Udena's, then I shall ask Master Udena to clarify it thus: 'How is
this Master Udena? What is the meaning of this?' In this way let
us discuss this matter."

5-6. "Brahmin, there are four kinds of persons to be found
existing in the world. What four?". ..(as Sutta 51, §§5-6) [160]...

"But, Master Udena, the kind of person who does not torment
himself or pursue the practice of torturing himself and who does
not torment others or pursue the practice of torturing others;
who, since he torments neither himself nor others, is here and
now hungerless, extinguished, and cooled, and abides experi-
encing bliss, having himself become holy - he does not torment
and torture either himself or others, both of whom desire plea-
sure and recoil from pain. That is why this kind of person satis-
fies my mind."

7. "Brahmin, there are two kinds of assembly. What two? Here
a certain assembly lusts after jewels and earrings and seeks
wives and children, men and women slaves, fields and land,
gold and silver. But htjre a certain assembly does not lust after
jewels and earrings, but having abandoned wives and children,
men and women slaves, fields and land, gold and silver, has gone
forth from the home life into homelessness. Now there is this kind
of person who does not torment himself or pursue the practice of
torturing himself and who does not torment others or pursue the
practice of torturing others; who, since he torments neither himself
nor others, is here and now hungerless, extinguished, and cooled,
and abides experiencing bliss, having himself become holy. In
which of the two kinds of assembly do you usually see this person,
brahmin - in the assembly that lusts after jewels and earrings and
seeks wives and children, men and women slaves, fields and land,
gold and silver; or in the assembly that does not lust after jewels
and earrings, but having abandoned wives and children... has
gone forth from the home life into homelessness?"


ii 162


To Ghotamukha 773


[161] "I usually see this kind of person. Master Udena, in the
assembly that does not lust after jewels and earrings, but having
abandoned wives and children... has gone forth from the home
life into homelessness."

8. "But only just now, brahmin, we understood you to say:
'Worthy recluse, there is no wanderers' life that accords with the
Dhamma: so it seems to me here, and that may be because I
have not seen such venerable ones as yourself or [because I have
not seen] the Dhamma here.'"

"Certainly, Master Udena, it was in order to learn that I spoke
those words. There is a wanderers' life that accords with the
Dhamma; so it seems to me here, and may Master Udena
remember me [to have spoken] thus. It would be good if, out of
compassion. Master Udena would expound to me in detail those
four kinds of persons he mentioned in brief."

9. "Then, brahmin, listen and attend closely to what I shall
say." - "Yes, sir," the brahmin Ghotamukha replied. The venera-
ble Udena said this:

10-30. "Brahmin, what kind of person torments himself and
pursues the practice of torturing himself? Here a certain person
goes naked ... (as Sutta 51, §§8-28) [162]... and abides experienc-
ing bliss, having himself become holy."

31. When this was said, the brahmin Ghotamukha said to the
venerable Udena: "Magnificent, Master Udena! Magnificent,
Master Udena! Master Udena has made the Dhamma clear in
many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been
overthrown, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to
one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those
with eyesight to see forms. I go to Master Udena for refuge and
to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus. From today let
Master Udena remember me as a lay follower who has gone to
him for refuge for life."

32. "Do not go to me for refuge, brahmin. Go for refuge to that
same Blessed One to whom I have gone for refuge."

"Where is he living now, that Master Gotama, accomplished
and fully enlightened. Master Udena?"

"That Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened, has
attained final Nibbana, brahmin."

"If we heard that Master Gotama was within ten leagues, we
would go ten leagues in order to see that Master Gotama,


774 Ghotamukha Sutta: Sutta 94


ii 163


accomplished and fully enlightened. If we heard that Master
Gotama was within twenty leagues... thirty leagues... forty
leagues. . .fifty leagues.. .a hundred leagues, [163] we would go a
hundred leagues in order to see that Master Gotama, accom-
plished and fully enlightened. But since that Master Gotama has
attained to final Nibbana, we go to that Master Gotama for
refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus. From
today let Master Udena remember me as a lay follower who has
gone for refuge for life.

33. "Now, Master Udena, the king of Anga gives me a daily
donation. Let me give Master Udena a regular donation from
that."

"What kind of regular donation does the king of Anga give
you, brahmin?"

"Five hundred kahapanas, Master Udena." 878

"It is not allowable for us to accept gold and silver, brahmin."

"If it is not allowable for Master Udena, I will have a
monastery built for Master Udena."

"If you desire to have a monastery built for me, brahmin, have
an assembly hall built for the Sangha at Pataliputta." 879

"I am still more satisfied and pleased that Master Udena sug-
gests that I give a gift to the Sangha. So with this regular dona-
tion and another regular donation, I shall have an assembly hall
built for the Sangha at Pataliputta."

Then with that regular donation [which he offered to Master
Udena] and another regular donation [added to it], the brahmin
Ghotamukha had an assembly hall built for the Sangha at
Pataliputta. And that is now known as the Ghotamukhl.


95 Canki Sutta
With Canki


[164] 1. Thus have I heard . 880 On one occasion the Blessed One
was wandering in the Kosalan country with a large Sangha of
bhikkhus, and eventually he arrived at a Kosalan brahmin vil-
lage named Opasada. There the Blessed One stayed in the Gods'
Grove, 881 the Sala-tree Grove to the north of Opasada.

2. Now on that occasion the brahmin Canki was ruling over
Opasada, a crown property abounding in living beings, rich in
grasslands, woodlands, waterways, and grain, a royal endow-
ment, a sacred grant given to him by King Pasenadi of Kosala.

3. The brahmin householders of Opasada heard: "The recluse
Gotama . ..{as Sutta 91, §3 ).. .Now it is good see such arahants."

4. Then the brahmin householders of Opasada set forth from
Opasada in groups and bands and headed northwards to the
Gods' Grove, the Sala-tree Grove.

5. Now on that occasion the brahmin Canki had retired to the
upper storey of his palace for his midday rest. Then he saw the
brahmin householders of Opasada setting forth from Opasada
in groups and bands and heading northwards to the Gods'
Grove, the Sala-tree Grove. When he saw them, he asked his
minister: "Good minister, why are the brahmin householders of
Opasada setting forth from Opasada in groups and bands and
heading northwards to the Gods' Grove, the Sala-tree Grove?"

6. "Sir, there is the recluse Gotama, the son of the Sakyans
who went forth from a Sakyan clan, who has been wandering in
the Kosalan country. ..(as Sutta 91, §3 ). ..They are going to see
that Master Gotama."

"Then, good minister, go to the brahmin householders of
Opasada and tell them: 'Sirs, the brahmin Canki says this:
"Please wait, sirs. The brahmin Canki will also go to see the
recluse Gotama.'""


775


776 Canki Sutta: Sutta 95


ii 166


"Yes, sir," the minister replied, [165] and he went to the brah-
min householders of Opasada and gave them the message.

7. Now on that occasion five hundred brahmins from various
states were staying at Opasada for some business or other. They
heard: "The brahmin Canki, it is said, is going to see the recluse
Gotama." Then they went to the brahmin Canki and asked him:
"Sir, is it true that you are going to see the recluse Gotama?"

"So it is, sirs. I am going to see the recluse Gotama."

8. "Sir, do not go to see the recluse Gotama. It is not proper.
Master Canid, for you to go to see the recluse Gotama; rather, it
is proper for the recluse Gotama to come to see you. For you, sir,
are well born on both sides, of pure maternal and paternal
descent seven generations back, unassailable and impeccable in
respect of birth. Since that is so, Master Canki, it is not proper
for you to go to see the recluse Gotama; rather, it is proper for
the recluse Gotama to come to see you. You, sir, are rich, with
great wealth and great possessions. You, sir, are a master of the
Three Vedas with their vocabularies, liturgy, phonology, and
etymology, and the histories as a fifth; skilled in philology and
grammar, you are fully versed in natural philosophy and in the
marks of a Great Man. You, sir, are handsome, comely, and
graceful, possessing supreme beauty of complexion, with sub-
lime beauty and sublime presence, remarkable to behold. You,
sir, are virtuous, mature in virtue, possessing mature virtue.
You, sir, are a good speaker with a good delivery; [166] you
speak words that are courteous, distinct, flawless, and commu-
nicate the meaning. You, sir, teach the teachers of many, and you
teach the recitation of the hymns to three hundred brahmin stu-
dents. You, sir, are honoured, respected, revered, venerated, and
esteemed by King Pasenadi of Kosala. You, sir, are honoured,
respected, revered, venerated, and esteemed by the brahmin
Pokkharasati. 882 You, sir, rule over Opasada, a crown property
abounding in living beings. . .a sacred grant given to you by King
Pasenadi of Kosala. Since this is so. Master Canki, it is not proper
for you to go to see the recluse Gotama; rather, it is proper for the
recluse Gotama to come to see you."

9. When this was said, the brahmin Canki told those brah-
mins: "Now, sirs, hear from me why it is proper for me to go to
see Master Gotama, and why it is not proper for Master Gotama
to come to see me. Sirs, the recluse Gotama is well born on both


ii 167


With Cankt 777


sides, of pure maternal and paternal descent seven generations
back, unassailable and impeccable in respect of birth. Since this
is so, sirs, it is not proper for Master Gotama to come to see me;
rather, it is proper for me to go to see Master Gotama. Sirs, the
recluse Gotama went forth abandoning much gold and bullion
stored away in vaults and depositories. Sirs, the recluse Gotama
went forth from the home life into homelessness while still
young, a black-haired young man endowed with the blessing of
youth, in the prime of life. Sirs, the recluse Gotama shaved off
his hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and went forth from
the home life into homelessness though his mother and father
wished otherwise and wept with tearful faces. Sirs, the recluse
Gotama is handsome, comely, and graceful, possessing supreme
beauty of complexion, [167] with sublime beauty and sublime
presence, remarkable to behold. Sirs, the recluse Gotama is vir-
tuous, with noble virtue, with wholesome virtue, possessing
wholesome virtue. Sirs, the recluse Gotama is a good speaker
with a good delivery; he speaks words that are courteous, dis-
tinct, flawless, and communicate the meaning. Sirs, the recluse
Gotama is a teacher of the teachers of many. Sirs, the recluse
Gotama is free from sensual lust and without personal vanity.
Sirs, the recluse Gotama holds the doctrine of the moral efficacy
of action, the doctrine of the moral efficacy of deeds; he does not
seek any harm for the line of brahmins. Sirs, the recluse Gotama
went forth from an aristocratic family, from one of the original
noble families. Sirs, the recluse Gotama went forth from a rich
family, from a family of great wealth and great possessions. Sirs,
people come from remote kingdoms and remote districts to
question the recluse Gotama. Sirs, many thousands of deities
have gone for refuge for life to the recluse Gotama. Sirs, a good
report of the recluse Gotama has been spread to this effect: "That
Blessed One is accomplished, fully enlightened, perfect in true
knowledge and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incom-
parable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and
humans, enlightened, blessed.' Sirs, the recluse Gotama possess-
es the thirty-two marks of a Great Man. Sirs, King Seniya
Bimbisara of Magadha and his wife and children have gone for
refuge for life to the recluse Gotama. Sirs, King Pasenadi of
Kosala and his wife and children have gone for refuge for life to
the recluse Gotama. Sirs, the brahmin Pokkharasati and his wife


778 Cankt Sutta: Sutta 95


ii 168


and children have gone for refuge for life to the recluse Gotama.
Sirs, the recluse Gotama has arrived at Opasada and is living at
Opasada in the Gods' Grove, the Sala-tree Grove to the north of
Opasada. Now any recluses or brahmins that come to our town
are our guests, and guests should be honoured, respected,
revered, and venerated by us. Since the recluse Gotama has
arrived at Opasada, he is our guest, and as our guest should be
honoured, respected, revered, and venerated by us. [168] Since
this is so, sirs, it is not proper for Master Gotama to come to see
me; rather, it is proper for me to go to see Master Gotama.

"Sirs, this much is the praise of Master Gotama that I have
learned, but the praise of Master Gotama is not limited to that,
for the praise of Master Gotama is immeasurable. Since Master
Gotama possesses each one of these factors, it is not proper for
him to come to see me; rather, it is proper for me to go to see
Master Gotama. Therefore, sirs, let all of us go to see the
recluse Gotama."

10. Then the brahmin CankI, together with a large company of
brahmins, went to the Blessed One and exchanged greetings
with him. When this courteous and amiable talk was finished,
he sat down at one side.

11. Now on that occasion the Blessed One was seated finishing
some amiable talk with some very senior brahmins. At the time,
sitting in the assembly, was a brahmin student named
Kapathika. Young, shaven-headed, sixteen years old, he was a
master of the Three Vedas with their vocabularies, liturgy,
phonology, and etymology, and the histories as a fifth; skilled in
philology and grammar, he was fully versed in natural philoso-
phy and in the marks of a Great Man. While the very senior
brahmins were conversing with the Blessed One, he often broke
in and interrupted their talk. Then the Blessed One rebuked the
brahmin student Kapathika thus: "Let not the venerable
Bharadvaja break in and interrupt the talk of the very senior
brahmins while they are conversing. Let the venerable
Bharadvaja wait until the talk is finished."

When this was said, the brahmin CankI said to the Blessed
One: "Let not Master Gotama rebuke the brahmin student
Kapathika. The brahmin student Kapathika is a clansman, he is
very learned, he has a good delivery, he is wise; he is capable of
taking part in this discussion with Master Gotama."


ii 170


With CankT 779


12. Then the Blessed One thought: "Surely, [169] since the
brahmins honour him thus, the brahmin student Kapathika
must be accomplished in the scriptures of the Three Vedas."

Then the brahmin student Kapathika thought: "When the
recluse Gotama catches my eye, I shall ask him a question."

Then, knowing with his own mind the thought in the brahmin
student Kapathika's mind, the Blessed One turned his eye
towards him. Then the brahmin student Kapathika thought:
"The recluse Gotama has turned towards me. Suppose I ask him
a question." Then he said to the Blessed One: "Master Gotama,
in regard to the ancient brahmanic hymns that have come down
through oral transmission and in the scriptural collections, the
brahmins come to the definite conclusion: 'Only this is true, any-
thing else is wrong.' What does Master Gotama say about this?"

13. "How then, Bharadvaja, among the brahmins is there even
a single brahmin who says thus: 'I know this, I see this: only this
is true, anything else is wrong'?" - "No, Master Gotama."

"How then, Bharadvaja, among the brahmins is there even a
single teacher or a single teacher's teacher back to the seventh
generation of teachers who says thus: 'I know this, I see this: only
this is true, anything else is wrong'?" - "No, Master Gotama."

"How then, Bharadvaja, the ancient brahmin seers, the cre-
ators of the hymns, the composers of the hymns, whose ancient
hymns that were formerly chanted, uttered, and compiled, the
brahmins nowadays still chant and repeat, repeating what was
spoken and reciting what was recited - that is, Atthaka,
Vamaka, Vamadeva, Vessamitta, Yamataggi, Angirasa, Bhara-
dvaja, Vasettha, Kassapa, and Bhagu 883 - did even these ancient
brahmin seers say thus: 'We know this, we see this: only this is
true, anything else is wrong'?" - [170] "No, Master Gotama."

"So, Bharadvaja, it seems that among the brahmins there is
not even a single brahmin who says thus: 'I know this, I see this:
only this is true, anything else is wrong.' And among the brah-
mins there is not even a single teacher or a single teacher's
teacher back to the seventh generation of teachers, who says
thus: 'I know this, I see this: only this is true, anything else is
wrong.' And the ancient brahmin seers, the creators of the
hymns, the composers of the hymns... even these ancient brah-
min seers did not say thus: 'We know this, we see this: only this
is true, anything else is wrong.' Suppose there were a file of



780 Canki Sutta: Sutta 95


ii 171


blind men each in touch with the next: the first one does not see,
the middle one does not see, and the last one does not see. So
too, Bharadvaja, in regard to their statement the brahmins seem
to be like a file of blind men: the first one does not see, the mid-
dle one does not see, and the last one does not see. What do you
think, Bharadvaja, that being so, does not the faith of the brah-
mins turn out to be groundless?"

14. "The brahmins honour this not only out of faith. Master
Gotama. They also honour it as oral tradition."

"Bharadvaja, first you took your stand on faith, now you
speak of oral tradition. There are five things, Bharadvaja, that
may turn out in two different ways here and now. What five?
Faith, approval, oral tradition, reasoned cogitation, and reflec-
tive acceptance of a view. 884 These five things may turn out in
two different ways here and now. Now something may be fully
accepted out of faith, yet it may be empty, hollow, and false; but
something else may not be fully accepted out of faith, yet it may
be factual, true, and unmistaken. Again, [171] something may be
fully approved of... may be well cogitated... may be well reflect-
ed upon, yet it may be empty, hollow, and false; but something
else may not be well reflected upon, yet it may be factual, true,
and unmistaken. [Under these conditions] it is not proper for a
wise man who preserves truth to come to the definite conclu-
sion: 'Only this is true, anything else is wrong/" 885

15. "But, Master Gotama, in what way is there the preserva-
tion of truth? 886 How does one preserve truth? We ask Master
Gotama about the preservation of truth."

"If a person has faith, Bharadvaja, he preserves truth when he
says: 'My faith is thus'; but he does not yet come to the definite
conclusion: 'Only this is true, anything else is wrong.' In this
way, Bharadvaja, there is the preservation of truth; in this way
he preserves truth; in this way we describe the preservation of
truth. But as yet there is no discovery of truth. 887

"If a person approves of something... if he receives an oral
tradition. . .if he [reaches a conclusion based on] reasoned cogita-
tion... if he gains a reflective acceptance of a view, he preserves
truth when he says: 'My reflective acceptance of a view is thus';
but he does not yet come to the definite conclusion: 'Only this is
true, anything else is wrong.' In this way too, Bharadvaja, there
is the preservation of truth; in this way he preserves truth; in


ii 173


With Canki 781


this way we describe the preservation of truth. But as yet there
is no discovery of truth."

16. "In that way. Master Gotama, there is the preservation of
truth; in that way one preserves truth; in that way we recognise
the preservation of truth. But in what way. Master Gotama, is
there the discovery of truth? In what way does one discover
truth? We ask Master Gotama about the discovery of truth."

17. "Here, Bharadvaja, a bhikkhu may be living in dependence
on some village or town. 888 Then a householder or a house-
holder's son goes to him and investigates him in regard to three
kinds of states: [172] in regard to states based on greed, in
regard to states based on hate, and in regard to states based on
delusion: 'Are there in this venerable one any states based on
greed such that, with his mind obsessed by those states, while
not knowing he might say, "I know," or while not seeing he
might say, "I see," or he might urge others to act in a way that
would lead to their harm and suffering for a long time?' As he
investigates him he comes to know: 'There are no such states
based on greed in this venerable one. The bodily behaviour and
the verbal behaviour of this venerable one are not those of one
affected by greed. And the Dhamma that this venerable one
teaches is profound, hard to see and hard to understand, peace-
ful and sublime, unattainable by mere reasoning, subtle, to be
experienced by the wise. This Dhamma cannot easily be taught
by one affected by greed.'

18. "When he has investigated him and has seen that he is
purified from states based on greed, he next investigates him in
regard to states based on hate: 'Are there in this venerable one
any states based on hate such that, with his mind obsessed by
those states... he might urge others to act in a way that would
lead to their harm and suffering for a long time?' As he investi-
gates him, he comes to know: 'There are no such states based on
hate in this venerable one. The bodily behaviour and the verbal
behaviour of this venerable one are not those of one affected by
hate. And the Dhamma that this venerable one teaches is pro-
found... to be experienced by the wise. This Dhamma dmnot
easily be taught by one affected by hate.'

19. "When he has investigated him and has seen that he is
purified from states based on hate, [173] he next investigates
him in regard to states based on delusion: 'Are there in this


782 Cankl Sutta: Sutta 95


ii 174


venerable one any states based on delusion such that, with his
mind obsessed by those states... he might urge others to act in a
way that would lead to their harm and suffering for a long
time?' As he investigates him, he comes to know: 'There are no
such states based on delusion in this venerable one. The bodily
behaviour and the verbal behaviour of this venerable one are
not those of one affected by delusion. And the Dhamma that this
venerable one teaches is profound... to be experienced by the
wise. This Dhamma cannot easily be taught by one affected by
delusion.'

20. "When he has investigated him and has seen that he is
purified from states based on delusion, then he places faith in
him; filled with faith he visits him and pays respect to him; hav-
ing paid respect to him, he gives ear; when he gives ear, he hears
the Dhamma; having heard the Dhamma, he memorises it and
examines the meaning of the teachings he has memorised; when
he examines their meaning, he gains a reflective acceptance of
those teachings; when he has gained a reflective acceptance of
those teachings, zeal springs up; when zeal has sprung up, he
applies his will; having applied his will, he scrutinises; 889 having
scrutinised, he strives; 890 resolutely striving, he realises with the
body the ultimate truth and sees it by penetrating it with wis-
dom. 891 In this way, Bharadvaja, there is the discovery of truth;
in this way one discovers truth; in this way we describe the dis-
covery of truth. But as yet there is no final arrival at truth." 892

21. "In that way. Master Gotama, there is the discovery of truth;
in that way one discovers truth; in that way we recognise the dis-
covery of truth. But in what way. Master Gotama, is there the
final arrival at truth? In what way does one finally arrive at truth?
We ask Master Gotama about the final arrival at truth." [174]

"The final arrival at truth, Bharadvaja, lies in the repetition,
development, and cultivation of those same things. In this way,
Bharadvaja, there is the final arrival at truth; in this way one
finally arrives at truth; in this way we describe the final arrival
at truth."

22. "In that way. Master Gotama, there is the final arrival at
truth; in that way one finally arrives at truth; in that way we
recognise the final arrival at truth. But what. Master Gotama, is
most helpful for the final arrival at truth? We ask Master Gotama
about the thing most helpful for the final arrival at truth."



ii 175


With Canki 783


"Striving is most helpful for the final arrival at truth,
Bharadvaja. If one does not strive, one will not finally arrive at
truth; but because one strives, one does finally arrive at truth.
That is why striving is most helpful for the final arrival at
truth."

23. "But what. Master Gotama, is most helpful for striving? We
ask Master Gotama about the thing most helpful for striving."

"Scrutiny is most helpful for striving, Bharadvaja. If one does
not scrutinise, one will not strive; but because one scrutinises,
one strives. That is why scrutiny is most helpful for striving."

24. "But what. Master Gotama, is most helpful for scrutiny? We
ask Master Gotama about the thing most helpful for scrutiny."

"Application of the will is most helpful for scrutiny, Bhara-
dvaja. If one does not apply one's will, one will not scrutinise;
but because one applies one's will, one scrutinises. That is why
application of the will is most helpful for scrutiny."

25. "But what. Master Gotama, is most helpful for application
of the will? We ask the Master Gotama about the thing most
helpful for application of the will."

"Zeal is most helpful for application of the will, Bharadvaja. If
one does not arouse zeal, one will not apply one's will; but
because one arouses zeal, one applies one's will. That is why
zeal is most helpful for application of the will."

26. "But what. Master Gotama, is most helpful for zeal? [175]
We ask Master Gotama about the thing most helpful for zeal."

"A reflective acceptance of the teachings is most helpful for zeal,
Bharadvaja. If one does not gain a reflective acceptance of the
teachings, zeal will not spring up; but because one gains a reflec-
tive acceptance of the teachings, zeal springs up. That is why a
reflective acceptance of the teachings is most helpful for zeal."

27. "But what. Master Gotama, is most helpful for a reflective
acceptance of the teachings? We ask Master Gotama about the
thing most helpful for a reflective acceptance of the teachings."

"Examination of the meaning is most helpful for a reflective
acceptance of the teachings, Bharadvaja. If one does not examine
their meaning, one will not gain a reflective acceptance of the
teachings; but because one examines their meaning, one gains a
reflective acceptance of the teachings. That is why examination
of the meaning is most helpful for a reflective acceptance of the
teachings."



784 Cankl Sutta: Sutta 95


ii 176


28. "But what, Master Gotama, is most helpful for examina-
tion of the meaning? We ask Master Gotama about the thing
most helpful for examination of meaning."

"Memorising the teachings is most helpful for examining the
meaning, Bharadvaja. If one does not memorise a teaching, one
will not examine its meaning; but because one memorises a
teaching, one examines its meaning."

29. "But what. Master Gotama, is most helpful for memorising
the teachings? We ask Master Gotama about the thing most
helpful for memorising the teachings."

"Hearing the Dhamma is most helpful for memorising the
teachings, Bharadvaja. If one does not hear the Dhamma, one
will not memorise the teachings; but because one hears the
Dhamma, one memorises the teachings. That is why hearing the
Dhamma is most helpful for memorising the teachings."

30. "But what. Master Gotama, is most helpful for hearing the
Dhamma? We ask Master Gotama about the thing most helpful
for hearing the Dhamma."

"Giving ear is most helpful for hearing the Dhamma,
Bharadvaja. [176] If one does not give ear, one will not hear the
Dhamma; but because one gives ear, one hears the Dhamma.
That is why giving ear is most helpful for hearing the
Dhamma."

31. "But what. Master Gotama, is most helpful for giving

ear? We ask Master Gotama about the thing most helpful for
giving ear." 6

"Paying respect is most helpful for giving ear, Bharadvaja. If
one does not pay respect, one will not give ear; but because one
pays respect, one gives ear. That is why paying respect is most
helpful for giving ear."

32. "But what. Master Gotama, is most helpful for paying
respect? We ask Master Gotama about the thing most helpful for
paying respect."

"Visiting is most helpful for paying respect, Bharadvaja. If one
does not visit [a teacher], one will not pay respect to him; but
because one visits [a teacher], one pays respect to him. That is
why visiting is most helpful for paying respect."

33. "But what. Master Gotama, is most helpful for visiting? We
ask Master Gotama about the thing most helpful for visiting."


ii 177


With Canki 785


"Faith is most helpful for visiting, Bharadvaja. If faith [in a
teacher] does not arise, one will not visit him; but because faith
[in a teacher] arises, one visits him. That is why faith is most
helpful for visiting."

34. "We asked Master Gotama about the preservation of truth,
and Master Gotama answered about the preservation of truth;
we approve of and accept that answer, and so we are satisfied.
We asked Master Gotama about the discovery of truth, and
Master Gotama answered about the discovery of truth; we
approve of and accept that answer, and so we are satisfied. We
asked Master Gotama about the final arrival at truth, and Master
Gotama answered about the final arrival at truth; we approve of
and accept that answer, and so we are satisfied. [177] We asked
Master Gotama about the thing most helpful for the final arrival
at truth, and Master Gotama answered about the thing most
helpful for the final arrival at truth; we approve of and accept
that answer, and so we are satisfied. Whatever we asked Master
Gotama about, that he has answered us; we approve of and
accept that answer, and so we are satisfied. Formerly, Master
Gotama, we used to think: 'Who are these bald-pated recluses,
these swarthy menial offspring of the Kinsman's feet, that they
would understand the Dhamma?' 893 But Master Gotama has
indeed inspired in me love for recluses, confidence in recluses,
reverence for recluses.

35. "Magnificent, Master Gotama! Magnificent, Master
Gotama!... (as Sutta 91, §37)... From today let Master Gotama
remember me as a lay follower who has gone to him for refuge
for life."


96 Esukan Sutta
To Esukarl


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.

2. Then the brahmin Esukarl went to the Blessed One and
exchanged greetings with him. When this courteous and ami-
able talk was finished, he sat down at one side and said:

3. "Master Gotama, the brahmins prescribe four levels of ser-
vice. They prescribe the level of service towards a brahmin, the
level of service towards a noble, the level of service towards a
merchant, and the level of service towards a worker. Therein,
Master Gotama, the brahmins prescribe this as the level of ser-
vice towards a brahmin: a brahmin may serve a brahmin, a
noble may serve a brahmin, a merchant may serve a brahmin,
and a worker may serve a brahmin. That is the level of service
towards a brahmin [178] that the brahmins prescribe. Master
Gotama, the brahmins prescribe this as the level of service
towards a noble: a ndble may serve a noble, a merchant may
serve a noble, and a worker may serve a noble. That is the level
of service towards a noble that the brahmins prescribe. Master
Gotama, the brahmins prescribe this as the level of service
towards a merchant: a merchant may serve a merchant and a
worker may serve a merchant. That is the level of service
towards a merchant that the brahmins prescribe. Master
Gotama, the brahmins prescribe this as the level of service
towards a worker: only a worker may serve a worker; for who
else could serve a worker? That is the level of service towards a
worker that the brahmins prescribe. What does Master Gotama
say about this?"

4. "Well, brahmin, has all the world authorised the brahmins
to prescribe these four levels of service?" - "No, Master
Gotama." - "Suppose, brahmin, they were to force a cut of meat


786


ii 179


To Esukarl 787


upon a poor, penniless, destitute man and tell him: 'Good man,
you must eat this meat and pay for it'; so too, without the con-
sent of those [other] recluses and brahmins, the brahmins never-
theless prescribe those four levels of service.

5. "I do not say, brahmin, that all are to be served, nor do I say
that none are to be served. For if, when serving someone, one
becomes worse and not better because of that service, then I say
that he should not be served. And if, when serving someone,
one becomes better and not worse because of that service, then I
say that he should be served.

6. "If they were to ask a noble thus: 'Which of these should
you serve - one in whose service you become worse and not bet-
ter when serving him, or one in whose service you become bet-
ter and not worse when serving him: [179] answering rightly, a
noble would answer thus: 'I should not serve the one in whose
service I become worse and not better when serving him; I
should serve the one in whose service I become better and not
worse when serving him.'

"If they were to ask a brahmin... to ask a merchant... to ask a
worker... answering rightly, a worker would answer thus: 'I
should not serve the one in whose service I become worse and
not better when serving him; I should serve the one in whose
service I become better and not worse when serving him.'

7. "I do not say, brahmin, that one is better because one is
from an aristocratic family, nor do I say that one is worse
because one is from an aristocratic family. I do not say that one
is better because one is of great beauty, nor do I say that one is
worse because one is of great beauty. I do not say that one is bet-
ter because one is of great wealth, nor do I say that one is worse
because one is of great wealth.

8. "For here, brahmin, one from an aristocratic family may kill
living beings, take what is not given, misconduct himself in sen-
sual pleasures, speak falsely, speak maliciously, speak harshly,
gossip, be covetous, have a mind of ill will, and hold wrong
view. Therefore I do not say that one is better because one is
from an aristocratic family. But also, brahmin, one from an aris-
tocratic family may abstain from killing living beings, from tak-
ing what is not given, from misconduct in sensual pleasures,
from false speech, from malicious speech, from harsh speech,
and from gossip, and he may be uncovetous, have a mind


788 Esukan Sutta: Sutta 96 ii 181


without ill will, and hold right view. Therefore I do not say that
one is worse because one is from an aristocratic family.

"Here, brahmin, one of great beauty. . .one of great wealth may
kill living beings. . .and hold wrong view. Therefore I do not say
that one is better because one is of great beauty... of great
wealth. But also, brahmin, one of great beauty... of great wealth
may abstain from killing living beings... and hold right view.
Therefore [180] I do not say that one is worse because one is of
great beauty. . .of great wealth.

9. "I do not say, brahmin, that all are to be served, nor do I say
that none are to be served. For if, when serving someone, one's
faith, virtue, learning, generosity, and wisdom increase in his
service, then I say that he should be served."

10. When this was said, the brahmin Esukan said to the
Blessed One: "Master Gotama, the brahmins prescribe four types
of wealth. They prescribe the wealth of a brahmin, the wealth of
a noble, the wealth of a merchant, and the wealth of a worker.

"Therein, Master Gotama, the brahmins prescribe this as the
wealth of a brahmin - wandering for alms; 894 a brahmin who
spurns his own wealth, wandering for alms, abuses his duty like
a guard who takes what has not been given. That is the wealth
of a brahmin which the brahmins prescribe. Master Gotama, the
brahmins prescribe this as the wealth of a noble - the bow and
quiver; a noble who spurns his own wealth, the bow and quiver,
abuses his duty like a guard who takes what has not been given.
That is the wealth df a noble which the brahmins prescribe.
Master Gotama, the brahmins prescribe this as the wealth of a
merchant - farming and cattle-breeding; 895 a merchant who
spurns his own wealth, farming and cattle-breeding, abuses his
duty like a guard who takes what has not been given. That is the
wealth of a merchant which the brahmins prescribe. Master
Gotama, the brahmins prescribe this as the wealth of a worker -
the sickle and carrying-pole; a worker who spurns his own
wealth, the sickle and carrying-pole, abuses his duty like a
guard who takes what has not been given. That is the wealth of
a worker which the brahmins prescribe. What does Master
Gotama say about this?"

11. "Well, brahmin, has all the world authorised the brahmins
to prescribe these four types of wealth?" - [181] "No, Master
Gotama." - "Suppose, brahmin, they were to force a cut of meat


ii 182


To Esukari 789


upon a poor, penniless, destitute man and tell him: 'Good man,
you must eat this meat and pay for it'; so too, without the con-
sent of those [other] recluses and brahmins, the brahmins never-
theless prescribe these four types of wealth.

12. "I, brahmin, declare the noble supramundane Dhamma as a
person's own wealth. 896 But recollecting his ancient maternal and
paternal family lineage, he is reckoned according to wherever he
is reborn. 897 If he is reborn in a clan of nobles, he is reckoned as a
noble; if he is reborn in a clan of brahmins, he is reckoned as a
brahmin; if he is reborn in a clan of merchants, he is reckoned as
a merchant; if he is reborn in a clan of workers, he is reckoned as
a worker. Just as fire is reckoned by the particular condition
dependent on which it burns - when fire burns dependent on
logs, it is reckoned as a log fire; when fire burns dependent on
faggots, it is reckoned as a faggot fire; when fire bums dependent
on grass, it is reckoned as a grass fire; when fire burns dependent
on cow dung, it is reckoned as a cowdung fire - so too, brahmin, I
declare the noble supramundane Dhamma as a person's own
wealth. But recollecting his ancient maternal and paternal lin-
eage, he is reckoned according to wherever he is reborn. If he is
reborn. . .in a clan of workers, he is reckoned as a worker.

13. "If, brahmin, anyone from a clan of nobles goes forth from
the home life into homelessness, and after encountering the
Dhamma and Discipline proclaimed by the Tathagata, he
abstains from killing living beings, from taking what is not given,
from incelibacy, from false speech, from malicious speech, from
harsh speech, and from gossip, and is uncovetous, has a mind
without ill will, and holds right view, he is one who is accom-
plishing the true way, the Dhamma that is wholesome. [182]

"If, brahmin, anyone from a clan of brahmins goes forth... If
anyone from a clan of merchants goes forth... If anyone from a
clan of workers goes forth from the home life into homelessness,
and after encountering the Dhamma and Discipline proclaimed
by the Tathagata, he abstains from killing living beings... and
holds right view, he is one who is accomplishing the true way,
the Dhamma that is wholesome.

14. "What do you think, brahmin? Is only a brahmin capable
of developing a mind of loving-kindness towards a certain
region, without hostility and without ill will, and not a noble, or
a merchant, or a worker?"


790 EsukClri Sutta: Sutta 96


ii 184


"No, Master Gotama. Whether it be a noble, or a brahmin, or a
merchant, or a worker - those of all four castes are capable of
developing a mind of loving-kindness towards a certain region,
without hostility and without ill will."

"So too, brahmin, if anyone from a clan of nobles goes
forth... (repeat §13 ). ..he is one who is accomplishing the true
way, the Dhamma that is wholesome.

15. "What do you think, brahmin? Is only a brahmin capable of
taking a loofah and bath powder, going to the river, and washing
off dust and dirt, and not a noble, or a merchant, or a worker?"

"No, Master Gotama. Whether it be a noble, or a brahmin, or a
merchant, [183] or a worker - those of all four castes are capable
of taking a loofah and bath powder, going to the river, and
washing off dust and dirt."

"So too, brahmin, if anyone from a clan of nobles goes
forth ... (repeat §13 ). ..he is one who is accomplishing the true
way, the Dhamma that is wholesome.

16. "What do you think, brahmin? Suppose a head-anointed
noble king were to assemble here a hundred men of different
birth ". ..(as Sutta 93, §13) [184]. .."For all fire has a flame, a
colour, and a radiance, and it is possible to use all fire for the
purposes of fire."

"So too, brahmin, if anyone from a clan of nobles goes
forth ... (repeat §13 ). ..he is one who is accomplishing the true
way, the Dhamma that is wholesome."

17. When this was ‘said, the brahmin Esukarl said to the
Blessed One: "Magnificent, Master Gotama! Magnificent, Master
Gotama!... From today let Master Gotama remember me as a lay
follower who has gone to him for refuge for life."



97 Dhananjani Sutta
To Dhananjani


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Rajagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels' Sanctuary.

2. Now on that occasion the venerable Sariputta was wander-
ing in the Southern Hills with a large Sangha of bhikkhus. Then a
certain [185] bhikkhu who had spent the Rains at Rajagaha went
to the venerable Sariputta in the Southern Hills and exchanged
greetings with him. When this courteous and amiable talk was
finished, he sat down at one side and the venerable Sariputta
asked him: "Is the Blessed One well and strong, friend?"

"The Blessed One is well and strong, friend."

"Is the Sangha of bhikkhus well and strong, friend?"

"The Sangha of bhikkhus too is well and strong, friend."

"Friend, there is a brahmin named Dhananjani living in
Rajagaha at the Tandulapala Gate. Is that brahmin Dhananjani
well and strong?"

"That brahmin Dhananjani too is well and strong, friend."

"Is he diligent, friend?"

"How could he be diligent, friend? He plunders brahmin
householders in the name of the king, and he plunders the king
in the name of the brahmin householders. His wife, who had
faith and came from a clan with faith, has died and he has taken
another wife, a woman without faith who comes from a clan
without faith."

"This is bad news that we hear, friend. It is bad news indeed
to hear that the brahmin Dhananjani has become negligent.
Perhaps sometime or other we might meet the brahmin
Dhananjani and have some conversation with him."

3. Then, having stayed in the Southern Hills as long as he
chose, the venerable Sariputta set out to wander towards


791


ii 187


792 Dhananjani Sutta: Sutta 97


Rajagaha. Wandering by stages he eventually arrived at Raja-
gaha, and there he lived in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels'
Sanctuary.

4. Then, when it was morning, the venerable Sariputta
dressed, and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Rajagaha
for alms. [186] Now at that time the brahmin Dhananjani was
having his cows milked in a cowshed outside the city. So when
the venerable Sariputta had wandered for alms in Rajagaha and
had returned from his almsround, after his meal he went to the
brahmin Dhananjani. The brahmin Dhananjani saw the vener-
able Sariputta coming in the distance, and he went to him and
said: "Drink some of this fresh milk. Master Sariputta, until it is
time for the meal."

"Enough, brahmin, I have finished my meal for today. I shall be
at the root of that tree for the day's abiding. You may come there."

"Yes, sir," he replied.

5. And then, after he had eaten his morning meal, the brahmin
Dhananjani went to the venerable Sariputta and exchanged
greetings with him. When this courteous and amiable talk was
finished, he sat down at one side and the venerable Sariputta
asked him: "Are you diligent, Dhananjani?"

"How can we be diligent. Master Sariputta, when we have to
support our parents, our wife and children, and our slaves, ser-
vants, and workers; when we have to do our duty towards our
friends and companions, towards our kinsmen and relatives,
towards our guests, towards our departed ancestors, towards
the deities, and towards the king; and when this body must also
be refreshed and nourished?"

6. "What do you think, Dhananjani? Suppose someone here
were to behave contrary to the Dhamma, to behave unrighteous-
ly for the sake of his parents, and then because of such behav-
iour the wardens of hell were to drag him off to hell. Would he
be able [to free himself by pleading thus]: 'It was for the sake of
my parents that I behaved contrary to the Dhamma, that I
behaved unrighteously, so let not the wardens of hell [drag me
off] to hell'? [187] Or would his parents be able [to free him by
pleading thus]: 'It was for our sake that he behaved contrary to
the Dhamma, that he behaved unrighteously, so let not the war-
dens of hell [drag him off] to hell'?"


ii 191


To Dhananjani 793


"No, Master Sariputta. Even while he was crying out, the war-
dens of hell would fling him into hell."

7-15. "What do you think, Dhananjani? Suppose someone
here were to behave contrary to the Dhamma, to behave
unrighteously for the sake of his wife and children... for the sake
of his slaves, servants, and workers... for the sake of his friends
and companions... for the sake of his kinsmen and relatives... for
the sake of his guests. ..[188] for the sake of his departed ances-
tors... for the sake of the deities... for the sake of the king... for
the sake of refreshing and nourishing this body, and because of
such behaviour the wardens of hell were to drag him off to hell.
Would he be able [to free himself by pleading thus]: 'It was for
the sake of refreshing and nourishing this body that I behaved
contrary to the Dhamma, that I behaved unrighteously, so let
not the wardens of hell [drag me off] to hell'? Or would others
be able [to free him by pleading thus]: 'It was for the sake of
refreshing and nourishing this body that he behaved contrary to
the Dhamma, that he behaved unrighteously, so let not the war-
. dens of hell [drag him off] to hell'?"

"No, Master Sariputta. Even while he was crying out, the war-
dens of hell would fling him into hell."

16. "What do you think, Dhananjani? Who is the better, one
who for the sake of his parents behaves contrary to the Dhamma,
behaves unrighteously, or one who for the sake of his parents
behaves according to the Dhamma, behaves righteously?"

"Master Sariputta, the one who for the sake of his parents
behaves contrary to the Dhamma, behaves unrighteously, is not
the better; the one who for the sake of his parents behaves
according to the Dhamma, behaves righteously, is the better."

"Dhananjani, there are other kinds of work, profitable and in
accordance with the Dhamma, by means of which one can sup-
port one's parents and at the same time both avoid doing evil
and practise merit.

17-25. "What do you think, Dhananjani? Who is the better,
one who for the sake of his wife and children... [189]... for the
sake of his slaves, servants, and workers... for the sake of his
friends and companions... [190]... for the sake of his kinsmen
and relatives... for the sake of his guests... for the sake of his
departed ancestors... for the sake of the deities. ..[191]. ..for the



794 Dhananjani Sutta: Sutta 97


ii 192


sake of the king... for the sake of refreshing and nourishing this
body behaves contrary to the Dhamma, behaves unrighteously,
or one who for the sake of refreshing and nourishing this body
behaves according to the Dhamma, behaves righteously?"

"Master Sariputta, the one who for the sake of refreshing and
nourishing this body behaves contrary to the Dhamma, behaves
unrighteously, is not the better; the one who for the sake of
refreshing and nourishing this body behaves according to the
Dhamma, behaves righteously, is the better."

"Dhananjani, there are other kinds of work, profitable and in
accordance with the Dhamma, by means of which one can
refresh and nourish this body and at the same time both avoid
doing evil and practise merit."

26. Then the brahmin Dhananjani, having delighted and
rejoiced in the venerable Sariputta' s words, rose from his seat
and departed.

27. On a later occasion the brahmin Dhananjani became afflict-
ed, suffering, and gravely ill. Then he told a man: "Come, good
man, [192] go to the Blessed One, pay homage in my name with
your head at his feet, and say: 'Venerable sir, the brahmin
Dhananjani is afflicted, suffering, and gravely ill; he pays
homage with his head at the Blessed One's feet.' Then go to the
venerable Sariputta, pay homage in my name with your head at
his feet, and say: 'Venerable sir, the brahmin Dhananjani is
afflicted, suffering, and gravely ill; he pays homage with his
head at the venerable Sariputta's feet.' Then say thus: 'It would
be good, venerable sir, if the venerable Sariputta would come to
the house of the brahmin Dhananjani, out of compassion.'"

"Yes, venerable sir," the man replied, and he went to the
Blessed One, and after paying homage to the Blessed One, he sat
down at one side and delivered his message. Then he went to
the venerable Sariputta and after paying homage to the vener-
able Sariputta, he delivered his message, saying: "It would be
good, venerable sir, if the venerable Sariputta would come to the
residence of the brahmin Dhananjani, out of compassion." The
venerable Sariputta consented in silence.

28. Then the venerable Sariputta dressed, and taking his bowl
and outer robe, he went to the residence of the brahmin
Dhananjani, sat down on a seat made ready, and said to the
brahmin Dhananjani: "I hope you are getting well, brahmin, I


ii 194


To Dhananjani 795


hope you are comfortable. I hope your painful feelings are sub-
siding and not increasing, and that their subsiding, not their
increase, is apparent."

29. "Master Sariputta, I am not getting well, I am not comfort-
able. My painful feelings are increasing, not subsiding; their
increase and not their subsiding is apparent. Just as if [193] a
strong man were splitting my head open with a sharp sword, so
too, violent winds cut through my head. I am not getting
well... Just as if a strong man were tightening a tough leather
strap around my head as a headband, so too, there are violent
pains in my head. I am not getting well... Just as if a skilled
butcher or his apprentice were to carve up an ox's belly with a
sharp butcher's knife, so too, violent winds are carving up my
belly. I am not getting well... Just as if two strong men were to
seize a weaker man by both arms and roast him over a pit of hot
coals, so too, there is a violent burning in my body. I am not get-
ting well, I am not comfortable. My painful feelings are increas-
ing, not subsiding; their increase and not their subsiding is
apparent."

30. "What do you think, Dhananjani? Which is better - hell or
the animal, ijealm?" - "The animal realm. Master Sariputta." -
"Which is better - the animal realm or the realm of ghosts?" -
"The realm of ghosts. Master Sariputta." - "Which is better - the
realm of ghosts or the realm of human beings?" - "Human
beings, Master Sariputta." [194] "Which is better - human
beings or the gods of the heaven of the Four Great Kings?" -
"The gods of the heaven of the Four Great Kings, Master
Sariputta." - "Which is better - the gods of the heaven of the
Four Great Kings or the gods of the heaven of the Thirty-three?"

- "The gods of the heaven of the Thirty-three, Master Sariputta."

- "Which is better - the gods of the heaven of the Thirty-three or
the Yama gods?" - "The Yama gods. Master Sariputta." -
"Which is better - the Yama gods or the gods of the Tusita heav-
en?" - "The gods of the Tusita heaven. Master Sariputta." -
"Which is better - the gods of the Tusita heaven or the gods who
delight in creating?" - "The gods who delight in creating.
Master Sariputta." - "Which is better - the gods who delight in
creating or the gods who wield power over others' creations?" -
"The gods who wield power over others' creations. Master
Sariputta."


796 Dhananjani Sutta: Sutta 97


ii 195


31. "What do you think, Dhananjani? Which is better - the
gods who wield power over others' creations or the Brahma-
world?" - "Master Sariputta said 'the Brahma-world.' Master
Sariputta said 'the Brahma- world.'"

Then the venerable Sariputta thought: "These brahmins are
devoted to the Brahma-world. Suppose I show the brahmin
Dhananjani the path to the company of Brahma?" [And he said:]
"Dhananjani, I shall show you the path to the company of
Brahma. Listen and attend closely to what I shall say." - "Yes,
sir," he replied. [195] The venerable Sariputta said this:

32. "What is the path to the company of Brahma? Here,
Dhananjani, a bhikkhu abides pervading one quarter with a
mind imbued with loving-kindness, likewise the second, like-
wise the third, likewise the fourth; so above, below, around, and
everywhere, and to all as to himself, he abides pervading the all-
encompassing world with a mind imbued with loving-kindness,
abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without hostility and without
ill will. This is the path to the company of Brahma.

33-35. "Again, Dhananjani, a bhikkhu abides pervading one
quarter with a mind imbued with compassion... with a mind
imbued with appreciative joy... with a mind imbued with equa-
nimity, likewise the second, likewise the third, likewise the
fourth; so above, below, around, and everywhere, and to all as
to himself, he abides pervading the all-encompassing world
with a mind imbued with equanimity, abundant, exalted,
immeasurable, without, hostility and without ill will. This too is
the path to the company of Brahma."

36. "Then, Master Sariputta, pay homage in my name with
your head at the Blessed One's feet, and say: 'Venerable sir, the
brahmin Dhananjani is afflicted, suffering, and gravely ill; he
pays homage with his head at the Blessed One's feet.'"

Then the venerable Sariputta, having established the brahmin
Dhananjani in the inferior Brahma-world, rose from his seat and
departed while there was still more to be done. 898 Soon after the
venerable Sariputta had left, the brahmin Dhananjani died and
reappeared in the Brahma-world.

37. Then the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus:
"Bhikkhus, Sariputta, having established the brahmin
Dhananjani in the inferior Brahma-world, rose from his seat and
departed while there was still more to be done."


ii 196


To Dhananjani 797


38. Then the venerable Sariputta went to the Blessed One, and
after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and said:
"Venerable sir, the brahmin Dhananjani is afflicted, suffering,
and gravely ill; he pays homage with his head at the Blessed
One's feet."

"Sariputta, having established the brahmin Dhananjani [196]
in the inferior Brahma-world, why did you rise from your seat
and leave while there was still more to be done?"

"Venerable sir, I thought thus: 'These brahmins are devoted to
the Brahma-world. Suppose I show the brahmin Dhananjani the
path to the company of Brahma.'"

"Sariputta, the brahmin Dhananjani has died and has reap-
peared in the Brahma-world." 899



98 Vasettha Sutta
To Vasettha


[115] 1. Thus have I heard . 900 On one occasion the Blessed One
was living at Icchanangala, in the wood near Icchanangala.

2. Now on that occasion a number of well-known, well-to-do
brahmins were staying at Icchanangala, that is, the brahmin
Cankl, the brahmin Tarukkha, the brahmin Pokkharasati, the
brahmin Janussoni, the brahmin Todeyya, and other well-
known, well-to-do brahmins.

3. Then, while the brahmin students Vasettha and Bharadvaja
were walking and wandering for exercise, this discussion arose
between them: "How is one a brahmin?" The brahmin student
Bharadvaja said: "When one is well-born on both sides, of pure
maternal and paternal descent seven generations back, unassail-
able and impeccable in respect of birth, then one is a brahmin."
The brahmin student Vasettha said: "When one is virtuous and
fulfils the observances, then one is a brahmin."

4. But the brahmin student Bharadvaja could not [116] con-
vince the brahmin student Vasettha, nor could the brahmin stu-
dent Vasettha convince the brahmin student Bharadvaja.

5. Then the brahmin student Vasettha addressed the brahmin
student Bharadvaja: "Sir, the recluse Gotama, the son of the
Sakyans who went forth from a Sakyan clan, is living at Iccha-
nangala, in the wood near Icchanangala. Now a good report of
Master Gotama has been spread to this effect: 'That Blessed One
is accomplished, fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge
and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of
persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened,
blessed.' Come, Bharadvaja, let us go to the recluse Gotama and
ask him about this matter. As he answers, so we will remember
it." - "Yes, sir," the brahmin student Bharadvaja replied.



798


Sn 117


To Vasettha 799


6. Then the two brahmin students, Vasettha and Bharadvaja,
went to the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him.
When this courteous and amiable talk was finished, they sat
down at one side and the brahmin student Vasettha addressed
the Blessed One in stanzas thus:

7. Vasettha

1. "We are both acknowledged to possess
The knowledge we claim of the Triple Veda,

For I am Pokkharasati's pupil

And he a pupil of Tarukkha.

2. We have attained full mastery
Over all that the Vedic experts teach;

Skilled in philology and grammar

We match our teachers in discussion. [117]

3. A dispute has arisen between us, Gotama,

Concerning the question of birth and class:

Bharadvaja says one is a brahmin by birth,

While I hold one is a brahmin by action. 901
Know this, O Seer, as our debate.

4. Since neither of us could convince the other,

Or make him see his point of view.

We have come to ask you, sir.

Widely famed to be a Buddha.

5. As people turn with palms upraised
Towards the moon when it reaches fullness.

So in the world do they venerate you

And pay homage to you, Gotama.

6. So now we ask of you, Gotama,

The eye uprisen in the world:

Is one a brahmin by birth or action?

Explain to us who do not know
How we should recognise a brahmin."



Sn 118


800 Vasettha Sutta: Sutta 98


8. Buddha

7. "I will explain to you as they really are,
Vasettha," said the Blessed One,

"The generic divisions of living beings;

For many are the kinds of birth.

8. Know first the grass and trees:

Though they lack self-awareness.

Their birth is their distinctive mark;

For many are the kinds of birth. [118]

9. Next come the moths and butterflies
And so on through as far as ants:

Their birth is their distinctive mark;

For many are the kinds of birth.

10. Then know the kinds of quadrupeds
[Of varied sorts] both small and large:

Their birth is their distinctive mark;

For many are the kinds of birth.

11. Know those whose bellies are their feet.
To wit, the long-backed class of snakes:
Their birth is their distinctive mark;

For many are the kinds of birth.

12. Know too the water-dwelling fish
That pasture in the liquid world:

Their birth is their distinctive mark;

For many are the kinds of birth.

13. Next know the birds that wing their way
As they range in open skies:

Their birth is their distinctive mark;

For many are the kinds of birth.


9.

14. "While in these births the differences
Of birth make their distinctive mark.
With humans no differences of birth


J


Sn 119


To Vasettha 801


Make a distinctive mark in them.

15. Nor in the hairs nor in the head
Nor in the ears nor in the eyes
Nor in the mouth nor in the nose
Nor in the lips nor in the brows;

16. Nor in the shoulders or the neck
Nor in the belly or the back

Nor in the buttocks or the breast
Nor in the anus or genitals;

17. Nor in the hands nor in the feet
Nor in the fingers or the nails
Nor in the knees nor in the thighs
Nor in their colour or in voice:

Here birth makes no distinctive mark
As with the other kinds of birth. [119]

18. In human bodies in themselves
Nothing distinctive can be found.
Distinction among human beings
Is purely verbal designation. 902

10 .

19. "Who makes his living among men 903
By agriculture, you should know

Is called a farmer, Vasettha;

He is not a brahmin.

20. Who makes his living among men
By varied crafts, you should know

Is called a craftsman, Vasettha;

He is not a brahmin.

21. Who makes his living among men
By merchandise, you should know

Is called a merchant, Vasettha;

He is not a brahmin.



802 Vasettha Sutta: Sutta 98


22. Who makes his living among men
By serving others, you should know
Is called a servant, Vasettha;

He is not a brahmin.

23. Who makes his living among men
By stealing, you should know

Is called a robber, Vasettha;

He is not a brahmin.

24. Who makes his living among men
By archery, you should know

Is called a soldier, Vasettha;

He is not a brahmin.

25. Who makes his living among men
By priestly craft, you should know

Is called a chaplain, Vasettha;

He is not a brahmin.

26. Whoever governs among men
The town and realm, you should know
Is called a ruler, Vasettha;

He is not a brahmin.

11 .

27. "I call him not a brahmin
Because of his origin and lineage.

If impediments still lurk in him.

He is just one who says 'Sir.' 904

Who is unimpeded and clings no more:
He is the one I call a brahmin.

28. Who has cut off all fetters
And is no more by anguish shaken.
Who has overcome all ties, detached:
He is the one I call a brahmin. [120]


Sn 120


29. Who has cut each strap and thong.
The reins and bridle-band as well.


Sn 120


To Vasettha 803


Whose shaft is lifted, the awakened one:
He is the one I call a brahmin.

30. Who endures without a trace of hate
Abuse, violence, and bondage too.

With strength of patience well arrayed:
He is the one I call a brahmin.

31. Who does not flare up with anger.
Dutiful, virtuous, and humble.

Subdued, bearing his final body:

He is the one I call a brahmin.

32. Who, like the rain on lotus leaves.

Or mustard seed on the point of an awl.
Clings not at all to sensual pleasures:

He is the one I call a brahmin.

33. Who knows right here within himself
The destruction of all suffering.

With burden lowered, and detached:

He is the one I call a brahmin.

34. Who with deep understanding, wise.
Can tell the path from the not-path
And has attained the goal supreme:

He is the one I call a brahmin.

35. Aloof alike from householders
And those gone into homelessness.

Who wanders without home or wish:

He is the one I call a brahmin.

36. Who has laid aside the rod
Against all beings frail or bold.

Who does not kill or have them killed:

He is the one I call a brahmin.

37. Who is unopposed among opponents.
Peaceful among those given to violence.


804 Vasettha Sutta: Sutta 98


Sn 121


Who does not cling among those who cling:

He is the one I call a brahmin.

38. Who has dropped all lust and hate.
Dropped conceit and contempt.

Like mustard seed on the point of an awl:

He is the one I call a brahmin. [121]

39. Who utters speech free from harshness.

Full of meaning, ever truthful.

Which does not damage anyone:

He is the one I call a brahmin.

40. Who in the world will never take
What is not given, long or short.

Small or big or fair or foul:

He is the one I call a brahmin.

41. Who has no more inner yearnings
Regarding this world and the next.

Who lives unyearning and detached:

He is the one I call a brahmin.

42. Who has no more indulgences
No more perplexity since he knows
Through having reached the Deathless Sphere:
He is the one I call a brahmin.

43. Who, by transcending all ties here
About both merit and evil deeds.

Is sorrowless, stainless, and pure:

He is the one I call a brahmin.

44. Who, pure as the spotless moon.

Is clear and limpid, and in whom
Delight and being have been destroyed:

He is the one I call a brahmin.

45. Who has passed beyond the swamp.

The mire, samsara, all delusion.


Sn 122


To Vasettha 805


Who has crossed to the further shore
And meditates within the jhanas.

Is unperturbed and unperplexed.

Attained Nibbana through no clinging:

He is the one I call a brahmin.

46. Who has abandoned sensual pleasures
And wanders here in homelessness
With sense desires and being destroyed:

He is the one I call a brahmin.

47. Who has abandoned craving too.

And wanders here in homelessness.

With craving and being both destroyed:

He is the one I call a brahmin.

48. Who leaves behind all human bonds
And has cast off the bonds of heaven.

Detached from all bonds everywhere:

He is the one I call a brahmin.

49. Who leaves behind delight and discontent.
Who is cool and without attachment,

The hero who has transcended the whole world:
He is the one I call a brahmin. [122]

50. Who knows how beings pass away
To reappear in many a mode.

Unclutching he, sublime, awake:

He is the one I call a brahmin.

51. Whose destination is unknown
To gods, to spirits, and to men.

An arahant with taints destroyed:

He is the one I call a brahmin.

52. Who has no impediments at all.

Before, behind, or in the middle.

Who is unimpeded and clings no more:

He is the one I call a brahmin.


Sn 123


806 Vasettha Sutta: Sutta 98


53. The herd's leader, perfected hero.

The great seer whose victory is won.
Unperturbed, cleansed, awakened:

He is the one I call a brahmin.

54. Who knows his manifold past lives
And sees the heavens and states of woe.

Who has reached the destruction of birth:

He is the one I call a brahmin.

12.

55. "For name and clan are assigned
As mere designations in the world;

Originating in conventions.

They are assigned here and there.

56. For those who do not know this fact.
Wrong views have long underlain their hearts;
Not knowing, they declare to us:

'One is a brahmin by birth.'

57. One is not a brahmin by birth.

Nor by birth a non-brahmin.

By action is one a brahmin.

By action is one a non-brahmin.

58. For men are farmers by their acts, 905
And by their acts are craftsmen too;

And men are merchants by their acts.

And by their acts are servants too.

59. And men are robbers by their acts.

And by their acts are soldiers too;

And men are chaplains by their acts.

And by their acts are rulers too. [123]

13.

<r

60. "So that is how the truly wise
See action as it really is.


Sn 123


To Vasettha 80 7


Seers of dependent origination.

Skilled in action and its results. 906

61. Action makes the world go round.

Action makes this generation turn.

Living beings are bound by action
Like the chariot wheel by the pin. ,

62. Asceticism, the holy life.

Self-control and inner training -
By this one becomes a brahmin,

In this supreme brahminhood lies. 907

63. One possessing the triple knowledge.

Peaceful, with being all destroyed:

Know him thus, O Vasettha,

As Brahma and Sakka for those who understand."

A-

14. When this was said, the brahmirt Students Vasettha and
Bharadvaja said to the Blessed One: "Magnificent, Master
Gotama! Magnificent, Master Gotama!...From today let Master
Gotama remember us as lay followers who have gone to him for
refuge for life."


99 Subha Sutta
To Subha


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.

2. Now on that occasion the brahmin student Subha,
Todeyya's son, was staying at the residence of a certain house-
holder in SavatthI for some business or other. 908 Then the brah-
min student Subha, Todeyya's son, asked the householder in
whose residence he was staying: "Householder, I have heard
that SavatthI is not devoid of arahants. What recluse or brahmin
may we go to today to pay our respects?"

"Venerable sir, this Blessed One is living at SavatthI in Jeta's
Grove, Anathapindika's Park. You may go to pay your respects
to that Blessed One, venerable sir." [197]

3. Then, having assented to the householder, the brahmin stu-
dent Subha, Todeyya's son, went to the Blessed One and
exchanged greetings with him. When this courteous and ami-
able talk was finished, he sat down at one side and asked the
Blessed One:

4. "Master Gotama, the brahmins say this: 'The householder is
accomplishing the true way, the Dhamma that is wholesome.
The one gone forth [into homelessness] is not accomplishing the
true way, the Dhamma that is wholesome.' What does Master
Gotama say about this?"

"Here, student, I am one who speaks after making an
analysis; 909 I do not speak one-sidedly. I do not praise the wrong
way of practice on the part either of a householder or one gone
forth; for whether it be a householder or one gone forth, one
who has entered on the wrong way of practice, by reason of his
wrong way of practice, is not accomplishing the true way, the
Dhamma that is wholesome. I praise the right way of practice on
the part either of a householder or one gone forth; for whether it


808


ii 198


To Subha 809


be a householder or one gone forth, one who has entered on the
right way of practice, by reason of his right way of practice, is
accomplishing the true way, the Dhamma that is wholesome."

5. "Master Gotama, the brahmins say this: 'Since the work of
the household life involves a great deal of activity, great func-
tions, great engagements, and great undertakings, it is of great
fruit. Since the work of those gone forth involves a small
amount of activity, small functions, small engagements, and
small undertakings, it is of small fruit.' What does Master
Gotama say about this?"

"Here too, student, I am one who speaks after making an analy-
sis; I do not speak one-sidedly. There is work involving a great
deal of activity, great functions, great engagements, and great
undertakings, which, when it fails, is of small fruit. There is work
involving a great deal of activity, great functions, great engage-
ments, and great undertakings, which, when it succeeds, is of
great fruit. There is work involving a small amount of activity,
small functions, small engagements, and small undertakings,
which, when it fails, is of small fruit. There is work involving a
small amount of activity, small functions, small engagements, and
small undertakings, which, when it succeeds, is of great fruit.

6. "What, [198] student, is that work involving a great deal of
activity... which, when it fails, is of small fruit? Agriculture is
that work involving a great deal of activity... which, when it
fails, is of small fruit. And what, student, is that work involving
a great deal of activity... which, when it succeeds, is of great
fruit? Agriculture again is that work involving a great deal of
activity... which, when it succeeds, is of great fruit. And what,
student, is that work involving a small amount of activity...
which, when it fails, is of small fruit? Trade is that work involv-
ing a small amount of activity... which, when it fails, is of small
fruit. 910 And what, student, is that work involving a small
amount of activity... which, when it succeeds, is of great fruit?
Trade again is that work involving a small amount of activi-
ty. . .which, when it succeeds, is of great fruit.

7. "Just as agriculture, student, is work that involves a great
deal of activity. . .but is of small fruit when it fails, so the work of
the household life involves a great deal of activity, great func-
tions, great engagements, and great undertakings, but is of small
fruit when it fails. Just as agriculture is work that involves a


810 Subha Sutta: Sutta 99


ii 200


great deal of activity... and is of great fruit when it succeeds, so
the work of the household life involves a great deal of activity,
great functions, great engagements, and great undertakings, and
is of great fruit when it succeeds. Just as trade is work that
involves a small amount of activity... and is of small fruit when
it fails, so the work of those gone forth involves a small amount
of activity, small functions, small engagements, and small
undertakings, and is of small fruit when it fails. Just as trade is
work that involves a small amount of activity... but is of great
fruit when it succeeds, so [199] the work of those gone forth
involves a small amount of activity, small functions, small
engagements, and small undertakings, but is of great fruit when
it succeeds."

8. "Master Gotama, the brahmins prescribe five things for the
performance of merit, for accomplishing the wholesome."

"If it is not troublesome for you, student, please state to this
assembly the five things that the brahmins prescribe for the per-
formance of merit, for accomplishing the wholesome."

"It is not troublesome for me. Master Gotama, when such ven-
erable ones as yourself and others are sitting [in the assembly]."

"Then state them, student."

9. "Master Gotama, truth is the first thing that the brahmins
prescribe for the performance of merit, for accomplishing the
wholesome. Asceticism is the second thing... Celibacy is the third
thing... Study is the fourth thing... Generosity is the fifth thing
that the brahmins prescribe for the performance of merit, for
accomplishing the wholesome. These are the five things that the
brahmins prescribe for the performance of merit, for accomplish-
ing the wholesome. What does Master Gotama say about this?"

"How then, student, 911 among the brahmins is there even a
single brahmin who says thus: 'I declare the result of these five
things having realised it myself with direct knowledge'?" - "No,
Master Gotama."

"How then, student, among the brahmins is there even a sin-
gle teacher or teacher's teacher back to the seventh generation of
teachers who says thus: 'I declare the result of these five things
having realised it myself with direct knowledge'?" - "No,
Master Gotama." [200]

"How then, student, the ancient brahmin seers, the creators of
the hymns, the composers of the hymns, whose ancient hymns


L



ii 201


To Subha 811


that were formerly chanted, uttered, and compiled the brahmins
nowadays still chant and repeat, repeating what was spoken,
reciting what was recited - that is, Atthaka, Vamaka, Vamadeva,
Vessamitta, Yamataggi, Angirasa, Bharadvaja, Vasettha,
Kassapa, and Bhagu - did even these ancient brahmin seers say
thus: 'We declare the result of these five things having realised it
ourselves with direct knowledge'?" - "No, Master Gotama."

"So, student, it seems that among the brahmins there is not
even a single brahmin who says thus: 'I declare the result of
these five things having realised it myself with direct knowl-
edge.' And among the brahmins there is not even a single
teacher or a single teacher's teacher back to the seventh genera-
tion of teachers, who says thus: 'I declare the result of these five
things having realised it myself with direct knowledge.' And the
ancient brahmin seers, the creators of the hymns, the composers
of the hymns... even these ancient brahmin seers did not say
thus: 'We declare the result of these five things having realised it
ourselves with direct knowledge.' Suppose there were a file of
blind men each in touch with the next: the first one does not see,
the middle one does not see, and the last one does not see. So
too, student, in regard to their statement the brahmins seem to
be like a file of blind men: the first one does not see, the middle
one does not see, and the last one does not see."

10. When this was said, the brahmin student Subha, Todeyya's
son, was angry and displeased with the simile of the file of blind
men, and he reviled, disparaged, and censured the Blessed One,
saying: "The recluse Gotama will be worsted." Then he said to the
Blessed One: "Master Gotama, the brahmin Pokkharasati of the
Upamahha clan, lord of the Subhaga Grove, says thus: 912 'Some
recluses and brahmins here claim superhuman states, distinctions
in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones. But what they
say [201] turns out to be ridiculous; it turns out to be mere words,
empty and hollow. For how could a human being know or see or
realise a superhuman state, a distinction in knowledge and vision
worthy of the noble ones? That is impossible.'"

11. "How then, student, does the brahmin Pokkharasati
understand the minds of all recluses and brahmins, having
encompassed them with his own mind?"

"Master Gotama, the brahmin Pokkharasati does not even
understand the mind of his slavewoman Punnika, having




812 Subha Sutta: Sutta 99


ii 202


encompassed it with his own mind/ so how could he under-
stand thus the minds of all recluses and brahmins?"

12. "Student, suppose there were a man born blind who could
not see dark and light forms, who could not see blue, yellow,
red, or pink forms, who could not see what was even and
uneven, who could not see the stars or the sun and moon. He
might say thus: 'There are no dark and light forms, and no one
who sees dark and light forms; there are no blue, yellow, red, or
pink forms, and no one who sees blue, yellow, red, or pink
forms; there is nothing even and uneven, and no one who sees
anything even and uneven; there are no stars and no sun and
moon, and no one who sees stars and the sun and moon. I do
not know these, I do not see these, therefore these do not exist.'
Speaking thus, student, would he be speaking rightly?"

"No, Master Gotama. There are dark and light forms, and
those who see dark and light forms... there are the stars and the
sun and moon, and those who see the stars and the sun and
moon. [202] Saying, 'I do not know these, I do not see these,
therefore these do not exist/ he would not be speaking rightly."

13. "So too, student, the brahmin Pokkharasati is blind and
visionless. That he could know or see or realise a superhuman
state, a distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble
ones - this is impossible. What do you think, student? What is
better for those well-to-do brahmins of Kosala such as the brah-
min CankI, the brahmin Tarukkha, the brahmin Pokkharasati,
the brahmin Janussoni^ or your father, the brahmin Todeyya -
that the statements they make accord with worldly convention
or flaunt worldly convention?" - "That they accord with world-
ly convention. Master Gotama."

"What is better for them, that the statements they make be
thoughtful or thoughtless?" - "Thoughtful, Master Gotama." -
"What is better for them, that they make their statements after
reflecting or without reflecting?" - "After reflecting. Master
Gotama." - "What is better for them, that the statements they
make be beneficial or unbeneficial?" - "Beneficial, Master
Gotama."

14. "What do you think, student? If that is so, did the state-
ment made by the brahmin Pokkharasati accord with worldly
convention or flaunt worldly convention?" - "It flaunted
worldly convention. Master Gotama." - "Was the statement


ii 204


To Subha 813


made thoughtful or thoughtless?" - "Thoughtless, Master
Gotama." - "Was the statement made after reflecting or without
reflecting?" - "Without reflecting. Master Gotama." - "Was the
statement made beneficial or unbeneficial?" - "Unbeneficial,
Master Gotama." [203]

15. "Now there are these five hindrances, student. What are the
five? The hindrance of sensual desire, the hindrance of ill will, the
hindrance of sloth and torpor, the hindrance of restlessness and
remorse, and the hindrance of doubt. These are the five hin-
drances. The brahmin Pokkharasati is obstructed, hindered,
blocked, and enveloped by these five hindrances. That he could
know or see or realise a superhuman state, a distinction in knowl-
edge and vision worthy of the noble ones - this is impossible.

16. "Now there are these five cords of sensual pleasure, stu-
dent. What are the five? Forms cognizable by the eye that are
wished for, desired, agreeable, and likeable, connected with sen-
sual desire and provocative of lust. Sounds cognizable by the
ear... Odours cognizable by the nose... Flavours cognizable by
the tongue... Tangibles cognizable by the body that are wished
for, desired, agreeable, and likeable, connected with sensual
desire and provocative of lust. These are the five cords of sensu-
al pleasure. The brahmin Pokkharasati is tied to these five cords
of sensual pleasure, infatuated with them and utterly committed
to them; he enjoys them without seeing the danger in them or
understanding the escape from them. That he could know or see
or realise a superhuman state, a distinction in knowledge and
vision worthy of the noble ones - this is impossible.

17. "What do you think, student? Which of these two fires would
have a [better] flame, colour, and radiance - a fire that might bum
in dependence on fuel, such as grass and wood, or a fire that might
bum independent of fuel, such as grass and wood?"

"If it were possible. Master Gotama, for a fire to bum indepen-
dent of fuel such as grass and wood, that fire would have a [bet-
ter] flame, colour, and radiance."

"It is impossible, student, it cannot happen that a fire could
bum independent of fuel such as grass or wood except through
[the exercise of] supernormal power. Like the fire that burns
dependent on fuel such as grass and wood, I say, is the rapture
[204] that is dependent on the five cords of sensual pleasure.
Like the fire that bums independent of fuel such as grass and


814 Subha Sutta: Sutta 99


ii 205


wood, I say, is the rapture that is apart from sensual pleasures,
apart from unwholesome states. And what, student, is the rap-
ture that is apart from sensual pleasures, apart from unwhole-
some states? Here, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and
abides in the first jhana, which is accompanied by applied and
sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure bom of seclusion.
This is a rapture apart from sensual pleasures, apart from
unwholesome states. Again, with the stilling of applied and sus-
tained thought, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second
jhana, which has self-confidence and singleness of mind without
applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure bom
of concentration. This too is a rapture apart from sensual plea-
sures, apart from unwholesome states.

18. "Of those five things, student, that the brahmins prescribe
for the performance of merit, for accomplishing the wholesome,
which of the five do they prescribe as the most fruitful for the
performance of merit, for accomplishing the wholesome?"

"Of those five things. Master Gotama, that the brahmins pre-
scribe for the performance of merit, for accomplishing the
wholesome, they prescribe generosity as the most fruitful for the
performance of merit, for accomplishing the wholesome."

19. "What do you think, student? Here a brahmin might be
holding a great sacrifice, and two other brahmins would go
there thinking to take part in that great sacrifice. One brahmin
among them would think: 'Oh, that only I might get the best
seat, the best water, the best almsfood in the refectory; that no
other brahmin might get the best seat, the best water, the best
almsfood in the refectory!' And it is possible that the other brah-
min, not that brahmin, gets the best seat, the best water, the best
almsfood in the refectory. Thinking about this, [205] the first
brahmin might become angry and displeased. What kind of
result do the brahmins describe for this?"

"Master Gotama, brahmins do not give gifts in such a way,
thinking: 'Let the others become angry and displeased because
of this.' Rather, brahmins give gifts motivated by compassion."

"That being so, student, isn't this the brahmins' sixth basis for
the performance of merit, that is, the motive of compassion?" 913

"That being so. Master Gotama, this is the brahmins' sixth basis
for the performance of merit, that is, the motive of compassion.


ii 206


To Subha 815


20. "Those five things, student, that the brahmins prescribe for
the performance of merit, for accomplishing the wholesome -
where do you often see those five things, among householders
or among those gone forth?"

"Those five things. Master Gotama, that the brahmins pre-
scribe for the performance of merit, for accomplishing the
wholesome, I often see among those gone forth, seldom among
householders. For the householder has a great deal of activity,
great functions, great engagements, and great undertakings: he
does not constantly and invariably speak the truth, practise
asceticism, observe celibacy, engage in study, or engage in gen-
erosity. But one gone forth has a small amount of activity, small
functions, small engagements, and small undertakings: he con-
stantly and invariably speaks the truth, practises asceticism,
observes celibacy, engages in study, and engages in generosity.
Thus those five things that the brahmins prescribe for the per-
formance of merit, for accomplishing the wholesome, I often see
among those gone forth, seldom among householders."

21. "Those five things, student, that the brahmins prescribe for
the performance of merit, for accomplishing the wholesome,
[206] I call equipment of the mind, that is, for developing a mind
that is without hostility and without ill will. Here, student, a
bhikkhu is a speaker of truth. Thinking, 'I am a speaker of
truth/ he gains inspiration in the meaning, gains inspiration in
the Dhamma, gains gladness connected with the Dhamma. It is
that gladness connected with the wholesome that I call an
equipment of the mind. Here, student, a bhikkhu is an
ascetic... one who is celibate... one who engages in study... one
who engages in generosity. Thinking, 'I am one who engages in
generosity/ he gains inspiration in the meaning, gains inspira-
tion in the Dhamma, gains gladness connected with the
Dhamma. It is that gladness connected with the wholesome that
I call an equipment of the mind. Thus those five things that the
brahmins prescribe for the performance of merit, for accom-
plishing the wholesome, I call equipment of the mind, that is, for
developing a mind that is without hostility and without ill will."

22. When this was said, the brahmin student Subha, Todey-
ya's son, said to the Blessed One: "Master Gotama, I have heard
that the recluse Gotama knows the path to the company of
Brahma."


I 1




816 Subha Sutta: Sutta 99 ii 207

"What do you think, student? Is the village of Nalakara near
here, not far from here?"

"Yes, sir, the village of Nalakara is near here, not far from here."

"What do you think, student? Suppose there was a man bom
and raised in the village of Nalakara, and as soon as he had left
Nalakara they asked him about the path to the village. Would
that man be slow or hesitant in answering?"

"No, Master Gotama. Why is that? Because that man has been
born and raised in Nalakara, and is well-acquainted with all the
paths to the village."

"Still, a man bom and raised in the village of Nalakara [207]
might be slow or hesitant in answering when asked about the
path to the village, but a Tathagata, when asked about the
Brahma-world or the way leading to the Brahma-world, would
never be slow or hesitant in answering. I understand Brahma,
student, and I understand the Brahma-world, and I understand
the way leading to the Brahma-world, and I under stand how
one should practise to reappear in the Brahma-world." 914

23. "Master Gotama, I have heard that the recluse Gotama
teaches the path to the company of Brahma. It would be good if
Master Gotama would teach me the path to the company of
Brahma."

"Then, student, listen and attend closely to what I shall say."

"Yes, sir," he replied. The Blessed One said this:

24. "What, student, is the path to the company of Brahma?
Here a bhikkhu abides pervading one quarter with a mind
imbued with loving-kindness, likewise the second, likewise the
third, likewise the fourth; so above, below, around, and every-
where, and to all as to himself, he abides pervading the all-
encompassing world with a mind imbued with loving-kindness,
abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without hostility, and without
ill will. When the deliverance of mind by loving-kindness is
developed in this way, no limiting action remains there, none
persists there. Just as a vigorous trumpeter could make himself
heard without difficulty in the four quarters, so too, when the
deliverance of mind by loving-kindness is developed in this
way, no limiting action remains there, none persists there-
This is the path to the company of Brahma.

25-27. "Again, a bhikkhu abides pervading one quarter with a
mind imbued with compassion... with a mind imbued with



ii 209


To Subha 817


appreciative joy . . .with a mind imbued with equanimity, likewise
the second, likewise the third, likewise the fourth; so above,
below, around, and everywhere, and to all as to himself, he
abides pervading the all-encompassing world with a mind
imbued with equanimity, abundant, exalted, [208] immeasur-
able, without hostility, and without ill will. When the deliverance
of mind by equanimity is developed in this way, no limiting
action remains there, none persists there. Just as a vigorous trum-
peter could make himself heard without difficulty in the four
quarters, so too, when the deliverance of mind by equanimity is
developed in this way, no limiting action remains there, none
persists there. This too is the path to the company of Brahma."

28. When this was said, the brahmin student Subha,
Todeyya's son, said to the Blessed One: "Magnificent, Master
Gotama! Magnificent, Master Gotama! Master Gotama has made
the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning
upright what had been overturned, revealing what was hidden,
showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in
the dark for those with eyesight to see forms. I go to Master
Gotama for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of
bhikkhus. Let Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower
who has gone to him for refuge for life.

29. "And now. Master Gotama, we depart. We are busy and
have much to do."

"Now is the time, student, to do as you think fit."

Then the brahmin student Subha, Todeyya's son, having
delighted and rejoiced in the Blessed One's words, rose from his
seat, and after paying homage to the Blessed One, keeping him
on his right, he departed.

30. Now on that occasion the brahmin Janussoni was driving out
of Savatthl in the middle of the day in an all-white chariot drawn
by white mares. 916 He saw the brahmin student Subha, Todey-
ya's son, coming in the distance and asked him: "Now where is
Master Bharadvaja coming from in the middle of the day?"

"Sir, I am coming from the presence of the recluse Gotama."

"What does Master Bharadvaja think of the recluse Gotama's
lucidity of wisdom? He is wise, is he not?" [209]

"Sir, who am I to know the recluse Gotama's lucidity of wis-
dom? One would surely have to be his equal to know the
recluse Gotama's lucidity of wisdom."



818 Subha Sutta: Sutta 99


ii 207


"Master Bharadvaja praises the recluse Gotama with high
praise indeed."

"Sir, who am I to praise the recluse Gotama? The recluse
Gotama is praised by the praised as best among gods and
humans. Sir, those five things that the brahmins prescribe for
the performance of merit, for accomplishing the wholesome, the
recluse Gotama calls equipment of the mind, that is, for devel-
oping a mind that is without hostility and without ill will."

31. When this was said, the brahmin Janussoni got down from
his all-white chariot drawn by white mares, and after arranging
his upper robe on one shoulder, he extended his hands in rever-
ential salutation towards the Blessed One and uttered this excla-
mation: "It is a gain for King Pasenadi of Kosala, it is a great gain
for King Pasenadi of Kosala that the Tathagata, accomplished
and fully enlightened, lives in his realm."


100 Sangarava Sutta
To Sangarava


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was wan-
dering in the Kosalan country with a large Sangha of bhikkhus.

2. Now on that occasion a brahmin woman named Dhananjani
was staying at Candalakappa, having full confidence in the
Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha. 917 One time she stum-
bled, and [on recovering her balance] exclaimed three times:
"Honour to the Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlight-
ened! Honour to the Blessed One, accomplished and fully
enlightened! Honour to the Blessed One, accomplished [210]
and fully enlightened!"

3. At the time there was a brahmin student named Sangarava
staying at Candalakappa. He was a master of the Three Vedas,
with their vocabularies, liturgy, phonology, and etymology, and
the histories as the fifth; skilled in philology and grammar, he
was fully versed in natural philosophy and in the marks of a
Great Man. Having heard the brahmin woman DhananjanI utter
those words, he said to her: "This brahmin woman DhananjanI
must be disgraced and degraded, since when there are brahmins
around she praises that bald-pated recluse."

[She replied:] "My dear sir, you do not know the virtue and
wisdom of the Blessed One. If you knew that Blessed One's
virtue and wisdom, my dear sir, you would never think of abus-
ing and reviling him."

"Then, madam, inform me when the recluse Gotama comes to
Candalakappa."

"Yes, dear sir," the brahmin woman Dhananjani replied.

4. Then, after wandering by stages in the Kosalan country, the
Blessed One eventually arrived at Candalakappa. There in
Candalakappa the Blessed One lived in the Mango Grove
belonging to the brahmins of the Todeyya clan.


819


820 Sangarava Sutta: Sutta 100


ii 211


5. The brahmin woman DhananjanI heard that the Blessed
One had arrived, so she went to the brahmin student Sangarava
and told him: "My dear sir, the Blessed One has arrived in
Candalakappa and he is living here in Candalakappa in the
Mango Grove belonging to the brahmins of the Todeyya clan.
Now is the time, dear sir, to do as you think fit."

"Yes, madam," he replied. Then he went to the Blessed One
and exchanged greetings with him. When this courteous [211]
and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side and said:

6. "Master Gotama, there are some recluses and brahmins who
claim [to teach] the fundamentals of the holy life after having
reached the consummation and perfection of direct knowledge
here and now. 918 Where among these recluses and brahmins
does Master Gotama stand?"

7. "Bharadvaja, I say that there is a diversity among those
recluses and brahmins who claim [to teach] the fundamentals of
the holy life after having reached the consummation and perfec-
tion of direct knowledge here and now. There are some recluses
and brahmins who are traditionalists, who on the basis of oral
tradition claim [to teach] the fundamentals of the holy life after
having reached the consummation and perfection of direct
knowledge here and now; such are the brahmins of the Three
Vedas. There are some recluses and brahmins who, entirely on
the basis of mere faith, claim [to teach] the fundamentals of the
holy life after having reached the consummation and perfection
of direct knowledge; such are the reasoners and investigators. 919
There are some recluses and brahmins who, having directly
known the Dhamma for themselves 920 among things not heard
before, claim [to teach] the fundamentals of the holy life after
having reached the consummation and perfection of direct
knowledge.

8. "I, Bharadvaja, am one of those recluses and brahmins who,
having directly known the Dhamma for themselves among
things not heard before, claim [to teach] the fundamentals of the
holy life after having reached the consummation and perfection
of direct knowledge. As to how I am one of those recluses and
brahmins, that may be understood in the following way.

9. "Here, Bharadvaja, before my enlightenment, while I was
still only an unenlightened Bodhisatta, I considered thus:


ii 213


To Sangarava 821


'Household life is crowded and dusty; life gone forth is wide
open. It is not easy while living in a home to lead the holy life
utterly perfect and pure as a polished shell. Suppose I shave off
my hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and go forth from
the home life into homelessness.'

10-13. "Later, Bharadvaja, [212] while still young... (as Sutt'a 26,
§§14-17)...And I sat down thinking: 'This will serve for striving.'

14-30. "Now these three similes occurred to me spontaneous-
ly never heard before... (as Sutta 36, §§17-33; but in the present
sutta in §§17-22 - corresponding to §§20-25 of Sutta 36 - the sen-
tence "But such painful feeling that arose in me did not invade
my mind and remain" does not occur)... the five bhikkhus were
disgusted and left me, thinking: 'The recluse Gotama now lives
luxuriously; he has given up his striving and reverted to luxu-
ry.'

31-41. "Now when I had eaten solid food and regained my
strength, then quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unwholesome states... (as Sutta 36, §§34-44; but in the pre-
sent sutta in §§36, 38, and 41 - corresponding to §§39, 41, and 44 of
Sutta 36 - the sentence "But such pleasant feeling that arose in me
did not invade my mind and remain" does not occur)... as hap-
pens in one who abides diligent, ardent, and resolute."

42. When this was said, the brahmin student Sangarava said to
the Blessed One: "Master Gotama's striving was unfaltering,
Master Gotama's striving was that of a true man, as it should be
for an Accomplished One, a Fully Enlightened One. But how is
it, Master Gotama, are there gods?"

"It is known to me to be the case, Bharadvaja, that there are
gods."

"But how is this. Master Gotama, that when you are asked,
'Are there gods?' you say: 'It is known to me to be the case,
Bharadvaja, that there are gods'? If that is so, isn't what you say
empty and false?" 921

"Bharadvaja, when one is asked, 'Are there gods?' [213]
whether one answers, "There are gods/ or 'It is known to me to
be the case [that there are gods],' a wise man can draw the defi-
nite conclusion that there are gods."

"But why didn't Master Gotama answer me in the first way?"

"It is widely accepted in the world, Bharadvaja, that there
are gods."


822 Sangarava Sutta: Sutta 100 ii 213

43. When this was said, the brahmin student Sangarava said to
the Blessed One: "Magnificent, Master Gotama! Magnificent,
Master Gotama! Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in
many ways, as though he were turning upright what had been
overturned, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one
who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with
eyesight to see forms. I go to Master Gotama for refuge and to
the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus. Let Master Gotama
remember me as a lay follower who has gone to him for refuge
for life."


Part Three

The Final Fifty Discourses

( Uparipannasapali )



1

The Division at Devadaha

( Devadahavagga )



101 Devadaha Sutta
At Devadaha


[214] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One
was living in the Sakyan country at a town of the Sakyans
named Devadaha. There the Blessed One addressed the
bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir/' they replied. The
Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, there are some recluses and brahmins who hold
such a doctrine and view as this: 'Whatever this person feels,
whether pleasure or pain or neither-pain-nor-pleasure, all that is
caused by what was done in the past. 922 So by annihilating with
asceticism past actions 923 and by doing no fresh actions, there
will be no consequence in the future. With no consequence in
the future, there is the destruction of action. With the destruc-
tion of action, there, is the destruction of suffering. With the
destruction of suffering, there is the destruction of feeling. With
the destruction of feeling, all suffering will be exhausted.' So
speak the Niganthas, bhikkhus.

3. "I go to the Niganthas who speak thus and I say: 'Friend
Niganthas, is it true that you hold such a doctrine and view as
this: "Whatever this person feels... all suffering will be exhaust-
ed"?' If, when they are asked thus, the Niganthas admit this and
say 'Yes,' I say to them:

4. "'But, friends, do you know that you existed in the past, and
that it is not the case that you did not exist?' - 'No, friend.' -
'But, friends, do you know that you did evil actions in the past
and did not abstain from them?' - 'No, friend.' - 'But, friends,
do you know that so much suffering has already been exhaust-
ed, or that so much suffering has still to be exhausted, or that
when so much suffering has been exhausted all suffering will
have been exhausted?' - [215] 'No, friend.' - 'But, friends, do
you know what the abandoning of unwholesome states is and


827


828 Devadaha Sutta: Sutta 101


ii 216


what the cultivation of wholesome states is here and now?' -
'No, friend.'

5. "'So, friends, it seems that you do not know that you existed
in the past and that it is not the case that you did not exist; or
that you did evil actions in the past and did not abstain from
them; or that you did such and such evil actions; or that so
much suffering has already been exhausted, or that so much suf-
fering has still to be exhausted, or that when so much suffering
has been exhausted all suffering will have been exhausted; or
what the abandoning of unwholesome states is and what the
cultivation of wholesome states is here and now. That being so,
it is not fitting for the venerable Niganthas to declare: "What-
ever this person feels, whether pleasure or pain or neither-pain-
nor-pleasure, all that is caused by what was done in the past. So
by annihilating with asceticism past actions and by doing no
fresh actions, there will be no consequence in the future. With
no consequence in the future. . .all suffering will be exhausted."

6. '"If, friend Niganthas, you knew that you existed in the past
and that it is not the case that you did not exist; or that you did
evil actions in the past and did not abstain from them; or that
you did such and such evil actions; or that so much suffering has
already been exhausted, or that so much suffering has still to be
exhausted, or that when so much suffering has been exhausted
all suffering will have been exhausted; or what the abandoning
of unwholesome states is and what the cultivation of whole-
some states is here and how; that being so, it would be fitting for
the venerable Niganthas to declare: "Whatever this person
feels. . . [216] . . . all suffering will be exhausted."

7. "'Friend Niganthas, suppose a man were wounded by an
arrow thickly smeared with poison, and because of this he felt
painful, racking, piercing feelings. Then his friends and com-
panions, kinsmen and relatives, brought a surgeon. The surgeon
would cut around the opening of the wound with a knife, probe
for the arrow with a probe, pull out the arrow, and apply a med-
icinal cauteriser to the opening of the wound, and at each step
the man would feel painful, racking, piercing feelings. Then on a
later occasion, when the wound was healed and covered with
skin, the man would be well and happy, independent, master of
himself, able to go where he likes. He might think: "Formerly I
was pierced by an arrow thickly smeared with poison, and


ii 218


At Devadaha 829


because of this I felt painful, racking, piercing feelings. Then my
friends and companions, kinsmen and relatives, brought a sur-
geon. The surgeon cut around the opening of the wound with a
knife, probed for the arrow with a probe, pulled out the arrow,
and applied a medicinal cauteriser to the opening of the
wound, and at each step I felt painful, racking, piercing feel-
ings. [217] But now that the wound is healed and covered with
skin, I am well and happy, independent, my own master, able
to go where I like."

8. "'So too, friend Niganthas, if you knew that you existed in
the past and that it is not the case that you did not exist... or
what the abandoning of unwholesome states is and what the
cultivation of wholesome states is here and now; that being so, it
would be fitting for the venerable Niganthas to declare:
"Whatever this person feels. . .all suffering will be exhausted."

9. '"But since, friend Niganthas, you do not know that you
existed in the past and that it is not the case that you did not
exist... or what the abandoning of unwholesome states is and
what the cultivation of wholesome states is here and now, it is
not fitting for the venerable Niganthas to declare: "Whatever
this person feels. . .all suffering will be exhausted."'

10. "When this was said, the Niganthas told me: [218] 'Friend,
the Nigantha Nataputta is omniscient and all-seeing and claims
to have complete knowledge and vision thus: "Whether I am
walking or standing or asleep or awake, knowledge and vision
are continuously and uninterruptedly present to me." He says
thus: "Niganthas, you have done evil actions in the past;
exhaust them with the performance of piercing austerities. And
when you are here and now restrained in body, speech, and
mind, that is doing no evil actions for the future. So by annihi-
lating with asceticism past actions and by doing no fresh
actions, there will be no consequence in the future. With no con-
sequence in the future... all suffering will be exhausted." We
approve of and accept this, and so we are satisfied/

11. "When this was said, I told the Niganthas: 924 'There are
five things, friend Niganthas, that may turn out in two different
ways here and now. What five? They are: faith, approval, oral
tradition, reasoned cogitation, and reflective acceptance of a
view, these five things may turn out in two different ways here
and now. Herein, what kind of faith do the venerable Niganthas


830 Devadaha Sutta: Sutta 101


ii 219


have in a teacher who speaks about the past? What kind of
approval, what kind of oral tradition, what kind of reasoned
cogitation, what kind of reflective acceptance of a view?'
Speaking thus, bhikkhus, I did not see any legitimate defence of
their position by the Niganthas.

12. "Again, bhikkhus, I said to the Niganthas: 'What do you
think, friend Niganthas? When there is intense exertion, intense
striving, do you then feel painful, racking, piercing feelings due
to intense exertion? But when there is no intense exertion, no
intense striving, do you then not feel any painful, racking,
piercing feelings due to intense exertion?' - 'When there is
intense exertion, friend Gotama, intense striving, then we feel
painful, racking, piercing feelings due to intense exertion; [219]
but when there is no intense exertion, no intense striving, then
we do not feel any painful, racking, piercing feelings due to
intense exertion.'

13. "'So it seems, friend Niganthas, that when there is intense
exertion... you feel painful, racking, piercing feelings due to
intense exertion; but when there is no intense exertion... you do
not feel any painful, racking, piercing feelings due to intense
exertion. That being so, it is not fitting for the venerable
Niganthas to declare: 925 "Whatever this person feels, whether
pleasure or pain or neither-pain-nor-pleasure, all that is caused
by what was done in the past. So by annihilating with asceticism
past actions and by doing no fresh actions, there will be no con-
sequence in the future. With no consequence... all suffering will
be exhausted."

14. "'If, friend Niganthas, when there was intense exertion,
intense striving, then painful, racking, piercing feelings due to
intense exertion were present, and when there was no intense
exertion, no intense striving, then painful, racking, piercing feel-
ings due to intense exertion were still present; that being so, it
would be fitting for the venerable Niganthas to declare:
"Whatever this person feels. . .all suffering will be exhausted."

15. "'But since, friend Niganthas, when there is intense exer-
tion, intense striving, then you feel painful, racking, piercing
feelings due to intense exertion, but when there is no intense
exertion, no intense striving, then you do not feel painful, rack-
ing, piercing feelings due to intense exertion, you are therefore
feeling only the painful, racking, piercing feelings of your self-


ii 221


At Devadaha 831


imposed exertion, and it is through ignorance, unknowing, and
delusion [220] that you mistakenly hold: "Whatever this person
feels. ..all suffering will be exhausted."' Speaking thus,
bhikkhus, I did not see any legitimate defence of their position
by the Niganthas.

16. "Again, bhikkhus, I said to the Niganthas: 'What do you
think, friend Niganthas? Is it possible that an action [whose
result] is to be experienced here and now 926 can, through exertion
and striving, become one [whose result] is to be experienced in
the next life?' - 'No, friend.' - 'But is it possible that an action
[whose result] is to be experienced in the next life can, through
exertion and striving, become one [whose result] is to be experi-
enced here and now?' - 'No, friend.'

17. '"What do you think, friend Niganthas? Is it possible that
an action [whose result] is to be experienced as pleasant can,
through exertion and striving, become one [whose result] is to
be experienced as painful?' - 'No, friend.' - 'But is it possible
that an action [whose result] is to be experienced as painful can,
through exertion and striving, become one [whose result] is to
be experienced as pleasant?' - 'No, friend.'

18. "'What do you think, friend Niganthas? Is it possible that
an action [whose result] is to be experienced in a matured [per-
sonality] can, by exertion and striving, become one [whose
result] is to be experienced in an unmatured [personality]?' 927 -
'No, friend.' - 'But is it possible that an action [whose result] is
to be experienced in an unmatured [personality] can, by exer-
tion and striving, become one [whose result] is to be experi-
enced in a matured personality?' - 'No, friend.'

19. '"What do you think, friend Niganthas? [221] Is it possible
that an action [whose result] is to be much experienced can,
through exertion and striving, become one [whose result] is to
be little experienced?' - 'No, friend.' - 'But is it possible that an
action [whose result] is to be little experienced can, through
exertion and striving, become one [whose result] is to be much
experienced?' - 'No, friend.'

20. "'What do you think, friend Niganthas? Is it possible that
an action [whose result] is to be experienced can, through exer-
tion and striving, become one [whose result] is not to be experi-
enced?' 928 - 'No, friend.' - 'But is it possible that an action
[whose result] is not to be experienced can, through exertion


832 Devadaha Sutta: Sutta 101


ii 222


j

•i


and striving, become one [whose result] is to be experienced?' -
'No, friend.'

21. "'So it seems, friend Niganthas, that it is impossible that an
action [whose result] is to be experienced here and now can,
through exertion and striving, become one [whose result] is to
be experienced in the next life, and impossible that an action
[whose result] is to be experienced in the next life can, through
exertion and striving, become one [whose result] is to be experi-
enced here and now; impossible that an action [whose result] is
to be experienced as pleasant can, through exertion and striving,
become one [whose result] is to be experienced as painful, and
impossible that an action [whose result] is to be experienced as
painful can, through exertion and striving, become one [whose
result] is to be experienced as pleasant; impossible that an action
[whose result] is to be experienced in a matured [personality]
can, by exertion and striving, become one [whose result] is to be
experienced in an unmatured [personality], and impossible that
an action [whose result] is to be experienced in an unmatured
[personality] can, through exertion and striving, become one
[whose result] is to be experienced in a matured [personality];
impossible that an action [whose result] is to be much experi-
enced can, through exertion and striving, become one [whose
result] is to be little experienced, and impossible that an action
[whose result] is to be little experienced can, through exertion
and striving, become one [whose result] is to be much experi-
enced; impossible that an action [whose result] is to be experi-
enced can, through exertion and striving, become one [whose
result] is not to be experienced, and impossible that an action
[whose result] is not to be experienced can, through exertion
and striving, become one [whose result] is to be experienced.
That being so, the venerable Niganthas' exertion is fruitless,
[222] their striving is fruitless.'

22. "So speak the Niganthas, bhikkhus. And because the
Niganthas speak thus, there are ten legitimate deductions from
their assertions that provide ground for censuring them:

(1) "If the pleasure and pain that beings feel are caused by
what was done in the past, then the Niganthas surely must have
done bad deeds in the past, since they now feel such painful,
racking, piercing feelings.



ii 223


At Devadaha 833


(2) "If the pleasure and pain that beings feel are caused by the
creative act of a Supreme God, 929 then the Niganthas surely
must have been created by an evil Supreme God, since they now
feel such painful, racking, piercing feelings.

(3) "If the pleasure and pain that beings feel are caused by
circumstance and nature, 930 then the Niganthas surely must
have bad luck, since they now feel such painful, racking, pierc-
ing feelings.

(4) "If the pleasure and pain that beings feel are caused by
class [among the six classes of birth], 931 then the Niganthas surely
must belong to a bad class, since they now feel such painful,
racking, piercing feelings.

(5) "If the pleasure and pain that beings feel are caused by
exertion here and now, then the Niganthas surely must strive
badly here and now, since they now feel such painful, racking,
piercing feelings.

(6) "If the pleasure and pain that beings feel are caused by
what was done in the past, then the Niganthas are to be cen-
sured; if not, then the Niganthas are still to be censured.

(7) "If the pleasure and pain that beings feel are caused by the
creative act of a Supreme God, then the Niganthas are to be cen-
sured; if not, they are still to be censured.

(8) "If the pleasure and pain that beings feel are caused by
chance, then the Niganthas are to be censured; if not, they are
still to be censured.

(9) "If the pleasure and pain that beings feel are caused by
class, then the Niganthas are to be censured; if not, they are still
to be censured.

(10) "If the pleasure and pain that beings feel are caused by
exertion here and now, [223] then the Niganthas are to be cen-
sured; if not, they are still to be censured.

"So speak the Niganthas, bhikkhus. And because the
Niganthas speak thus, these ten legitimate deductions from their
assertions provide grounds for censuring them. Thus their exer-
tion is fruitless, their striving is fruitless.

23. "And how is exertion fruitful, bhikkhus, how is striving
fruitful? Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu is not overwhelmed by suf-
fering and does not overwhelm himself with suffering; and he
does not give up the pleasure that accords with Dhamma, yet he



834 Devadaha Sutta: Sutta 101


ii 224


is not infatuated with that pleasure. 932 He knows thus: 'When I
strive with determination, this particular source of suffering
fades away in me because of that determined striving; and when
I look on with equanimity, this particular source of suffering
fades away in me while I develop equanimity.' 933 He strives with
determination in regard to that particular source of suffering
which fades away in him because of that determined striving;
and he develops equanimity in regard to that particular source of
suffering which fades away in him while he is developing equa-
nimity. When he strives with determination, such and such a
source of suffering fades away in him because of that deter-
mined striving; thus that suffering is exhausted in him. When he
looks on with equanimity, such and such a source of suffering
fades away in him while he develops equanimity; thus that suf-
fering is exhausted in him.

24. "Suppose, bhikkhus, a man loved a woman with his
mind bound to her by intense desire and passion. He might see
that woman standing with another man, chatting, joking, and
laughing. What do you think, bhikkhus? Would not sorrow,
lamentation, pain, grief, and despair arise in that man when he
sees that woman standing with another man, chatting, joking,
and laughing?"

"Yes, venerable sir. Why is that? Because that man loves that
woman with his mind bound to her by intense desire and pas-
sion; [224] that is why sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and
despair would arise in him when he sees her standing with
another man, chatting, joking, and laughing."

25. "Then, bhikkhus, the man might think: T love this woman
with my mind bound to her by intense desire and passion; thus
sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair arise in me when I
see her standing with another man, chatting, joking, and laugh-
ing. What if I were to abandon my desire and lust for that
woman?' He would abandon his desire and lust for that woman.
On a later occasion he might see that woman standing with
another man, chatting, joking, and laughing. What do you think,
bhikkhus? Would sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair
arise in that man when he sees that woman standing with
another man...?"

"No, venerable sir. Why is that? Because that man no longer
loves that woman; that is why sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief.


ii 226


At Devadaha 835


and despair do not arise in him when he sees that woman stand-
ing with another man.

26. "So too, bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu is not overwhelmed by
suffering and does not overwhelm himself with suffering. . . (as in
§23 above) [225]... thus that suffering is exhausted in him. Thus,
bhikkhus, the exertion is fruitful, the striving is fruitful.

27. "Again, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu considers thus: 'While I live
according to my pleasure, unwholesome states increase in me
and wholesome states diminish; but when I exert myself in what
is painful, unwholesome states diminish in me and wholesome
states increase. What if I exert myself in what is painful?' He
exerts himself in what is painful. When he does so, unwhole-
some states diminish in him and wholesome states increase. 934
At a later time he does not exert himself in what is painful. Why
is that? The purpose for which that bhikkhu exerted himself in
what is painful has been achieved; that is why at a later time he
does not exert h im self in what is painful.

28. "Suppose, bhikkhus, an arrowsmith were warming and
heating an arrow shaft between two flames, making it straight
and workable. When the arrow shaft had been warmed and
heated between the two flames and had been made straight
and workable, then at a later time he would not again warm
and heat the arrow shaft and make it straight and workable.
Why is that? The purpose for which that arrowsmith had
warmed and heated the arrow and made it straight and work-
able has been achieved; that is why at a later time he would
not again warm and heat the arrow shaft and make it straight
and workable.

29. "So too, a bhikkhu considers thus... (as in §27 above )
[226]... that is why at a later time he does not exert himself in
what is painful. Thus too, bhikkhus, the exertion is fruitful, the
striving is fruitful.

30-37. "Again, bhikkhus, here a Tathagata appears in the
world, accomplished, fully enlightened... (as Sutta 51, §§12-19)...
he purifies his mind from doubt.

38. "Having thus abandoned these five hindrances, imperfec-
tions of the mind that weaken wisdom, quite secluded from sen-
sual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, he enters
upon and abides in the first jhana, which is accompanied by
applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born


836 Devadaha Sutta: Sutta 101


ii 227


of seclusion. Thus too, bhikkhus, the exertion is fruitful, the
striving is fruitful.

39. "Again, bhikkhus, with the stilling of applied and sus-
tained thought, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second
jhana, which has self-confidence and singleness of mind without
applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure bom
of concentration. Thus too, bhikkhus, the exertion is fruitful, the
striving is fruitful.

40. "Again, bhikkhus, with the fading away as well of rapture,
a bhikkhu abides in equanimity, and mindful and fully aware,
still feeling pleasure with the body, he enters upon and abides in
the third jhana, on account of which noble ones announce: 'He
has a pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.'
Thus too, bhikkhus, the exertion is fruitful, the striving is fruitful.

41. "Again, bhikkhus, with the abandoning of pleasure and
pain, and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, a
bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the fourth jhana, which has
neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to
equanimity. Thus too, bhikkhus, the exertion is fruitful, the
striving is fruitful.

42. "When his concentrated mind is thus purified, bright,
unblemished, rid of imperfection, malleable, wieldy, steady,
and attained to imperturbability, he directs it to knowledge of
the recollection of past lives. He recollects his manifold past
lives, that is, one birth, two births ... (as Sutta 51, §24 )... Thus
with their aspects and particulars he recollects his manifold
past lives. Thus too, bhikkhus, the exertion is fruitful, the striv-
ing is fruitful.

43. "When his concentrated mind is thus purified, bright,
unblemished, rid of imperfection, malleable, wieldy, steady, and
attained to imperturbability, he directs it to knowledge of the
passing away and reappearance of beings . ..(as Sutta 51, §25)..-
Thus with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the
human, he sees beings passing away and reappearing, inferior
and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and he
understands how beings pass on according to their actions. Thus
too, bhikkhus, the exertion is fruitful, the striving is fruitful. [227]

44. "When his concentrated mind is thus purified, bright,
unblemished, rid of imperfection, malleable, wieldy, steady, and
attained to imperturbability, he directs it to knowledge of the


ii 227


At Devadaha 837


destruction of the taints. He understands as it actually is: 'This is
suffering';... 'This is the origin of suffering';... 'This is the cessa-
tion of suffering';... 'This is the way leading to the cessation of
suffering';... 'These are the taints';... 'This is the origin of the
taints';... 'This is the cessation of the taints';... 'This is the way
leading to the cessation of the taints.'

45. "When he knows and sees thus, his mind is liberated from
the taint of sensual desire, from the taint of being, and from the
taint of ignorance. When it is liberated there comes the knowl-
edge: 'It is liberated.' He understands: 'Birth is destroyed, the
holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done,
there is no more coming to any state of being.' Thus too,
bhikkhus, the exertion is fruitful, the striving is fruitful.

46. "So the Tathagata speaks, bhikkhus. And because the
Tathagata speaks thus, there are ten legitimate grounds for
praising him:

(1) "If the pleasure and pain that beings feel are caused by
what was done in the past, then the Tathagata surely must have
done good deeds in the past, since he now feels such taintless
pleasant feelings.

(2) "If the pleasure and pain that beings feel are caused by the
creative act of a Supreme God, then the Tathagata surely must
have been created by a good Supreme God, since he now feels
such taintless pleasant feelings.

(3) "If the pleasure and pain that beings feel are caused by cir-
cumstance and nature, then the Tathagata surely must have
good luck, since he now feels such taintless pleasant feelings.

(4) "If the pleasure and pain that beings feel are caused by
class [among the six classes of birth], then the Tathagata surely
must belong to a good class, since he now feels such taintless
pleasant feelings.

(5) "If the pleasure and pain that beings feel are caused by exer-
tion here and now, then the Tathagata surely must strive well
here and now, since he now feels such taintless pleasant feelings.

(6) "If the pleasure and pain that beings feel are caused by
what was done in the past, then the Tathagata is to be praised; if
not, then the Tathagata is still to be praised.

(7) "If the pleasure and pain that beings feel are caused by the
creative act of a Supreme God, then the Tathagata is to be
praised; if not, then the Tathagata is still to be praised.


838 Devadaha Sutta: Sutta 101


ii 228


(8) "If the pleasure and pain that beings feel are caused by
chance, then the Tathagata is to be praised; if not, then the
Tathagata is still to be praised.

(9) "If the pleasure and pain that beings feel are caused by
class, then the Tathagata is to be praised; if not, then the
Tathagata is still to be praised.

(10) "If the pleasure and pain that beings feel are caused by
exertion here and now, then the Tathagata is to be praised; if
not, [228] then the Tathagata is still to be praised.

"So the Tathagata speaks, bhikkhus. And because the Tatha-
gata speaks thus, there are these ten legitimate grounds for
praising him."

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


102 Pancattaya Sutta
The Five and Three


1. Thus have I heard . 935 On one occasion the Blessed One was
living at Savatthl in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There
he addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:

(speculations about the future)

2. "Bhikkhus, there are some recluses and brahmins who specu-
late about the future and hold views about the future, who
assert various doctrinal propositions concerning the future.

(I) Some assert thus: 'The self is percipient and unimpaired 936
after death.'

(II) Some assert thus: 'The self is non-percipient and unimpaired
after death.'

(III) Some assert thus: 'The self is neither percipient nor non-
percipient and unimpaired after death.'

(IV) Or they describe the annihilation, destruction, and exter-
mination of an existing being [at death].

(V) Or some assert Nibbana here and now.

"Thus (a) they either describe an existing self that is unimpaired
after death; (b) or they describe the annihilation, destruction, arid
extermination of an existing being [at death]; (c) or they assert
Nibbana here and now. Thus these [views] being five become
three, and being three become five. This is the summary of the
'five and three.'

3. (I) "Therein, bhikkhus, those recluses and brahmins [229]
who describe the self as percipient and unimpaired after death
describe such a self, percipient and unimpaired after death, to
be either:


839



840 Pancattaya Sutta: Sutta 102


material;
or immaterial;

or both material and immaterial;
or neither material nor immaterial;
or percipient of unity;
or percipient of diversity;
or percipient of the limited;
or percipient of the immeasurable. 937
Or else, among those few who go beyond this, some assert the
consciousness-kasina, immeasurable and imperturbable, [to be
the self]. 938

4. "The Tathagata, bhikkhus, understands this thus: 'Those
good recluses and brahmins who describe the self as percipient
and unimpaired after death describe such a self to be either
material... or they describe it to be percipient of the immeasur-
able. Or else, [230] since the perception "there is nothing" is
declared to be the purest, supreme, best, and unsurpassed of
those perceptions - whether perceptions of form or of the form-
less, of the limited or the immeasurable 939 - some assert the
base of nothingness, immeasurable and imperturbable, [to be
the self]. That is conditioned and gross, but there is cessation of
formations.' Having known 'There is this/ seeing the escape
from that, the Tathagata has gone beyond that. 940

5. (II) "Therein, bhikkhus, those recluses and brahmins who
describe the self as non-percipient and unimpaired after death
describe such a self, noh-percipient and unimpaired after death,
to be either:

material;
or immaterial;

or both material and immaterial;
or neither material nor immaterial. 941

6. "Therein, bhikkhus, these criticise those recluses and brah-
mins who describe the self as percipient and unimpaired after
death. Why is that? Because they say: 'Perception is a disease,
perception is a tumour, perception is a dart; this is peaceful, this
is sublime, that is, non-perception.'

7. "The Tathagata, bhikkhus, understands this thus: 'Those
good recluses and brahmins who describe the self as non-percipi-
ent and unimpaired after death describe such a self, non-percipi-
ent and unimpaired after death, to be either material. . .or neither




ii 232


The Five and Three 841


material nor immaterial. That any recluse or brahmin could say:
"Apart from material form, apart from feeling, apart from percep-
tion, apart from formations, I shall describe the coming and going
of consciousness, its passing away and re-appearance, its growth,
increase, and maturation" - that is impossible. 942 That is condi-
tioned and gross, but there is [231] cessation of formations.'
Having known 'There is this,' seeing the escape from that, the
Tathagata has gone beyond that.

8. (Ill) "Therein, bhikkhus, those recluses and brahmins who
describe the self as neither percipient nor non-percipient and
unimpaired after death describe such a self, neither percipient
nor non-percipient and unimpaired after death, to be either:

material;

or immaterial;

or both material and immaterial;

or neither material nor immaterial. 943

9. "Therein, bhikkhus, these criticise those good recluses and
brahmins who describe the self as percipient and unimpaired
after death, and they criticise those good recluses and brahmins
who describe the self as non-percipient and unimpaired after
death. Why is that? Because they say: 'Perception is a disease,
perception is a tumour, perception is a dart, and non-perception
is stupefaction; 944 this is peaceful, this is sublime, that is, neither-
perception-nor-non-perception.'

10. "The Tathagata, bhikkhus, understands this thus: 'Those
good recluses and brahmins who describe the self as neither per-
cipient nor non-percipient and unimpaired after death describe
such a self, neither percipient nor non-percipient and unimpaired
after death, to be either material. . .or neither material nor immate-
rial. If any recluses or brahmins describe the entering upon this
base to come about through a measure of formations regarding
what is seen, heard, sensed, and cognized, that is declared to be a
disaster for entering upon this base. 945 [232] For this base, it is
declared, is not to be attained as an attainment with formations;
this base, it is declared, is to be attained as an attainment with a
residue of formations 946 That is conditioned and gross, but there
is cessation of formations.' Having known 'There is this,' seeing
the escape from that, the Tathagata has gone beyond that.

11. (IV) "Therein, bhikkhus, those recluses and brahmins who
describe the annihilation, destruction, and extermination of an



842 Pancattaya Sutta: Sutta 102


ii 233


existing being [at death} 947 criticise those good recluses and
brahmins who describe the self as percipient and unimpaired
after death, and they criticise those good recluses and brahmins
who describe the self as non-percipient and unimpaired after
death, and they criticise those good recluses and brahmins who
describe the self as neither percipient nor non-percipient and
unimpaired after death. Why is that? All these good recluses
and brahmins, rushing onwards, assert their attachment thus:
'We shall be thus after death, we shall be thus after death.' Just
as a merchant going to market thinks: 'Through this, that will be
mine; with this, I will get that'; so too, these good recluses and
brahmins seem like merchants when they declare: 'We shall be
thus after death, we shall be thus after death.'

12. "The Tathagata, bhikkhus, understands this thus: 'Those
good recluses and brahmins who describe the annihilation,
destruction, and extermination of an existing being [at death],
through fear of personality and disgust with personality, keep
running and circling around that same personality. 948 Just as a
dog bound by a leash tied to a firm post or pillar [233] keeps on
running and circling around that same post or pillar; so too,
these good recluses and brahmins, through fear of personality
and disgust with personality, keep running and circling around
that same personality. That is conditioned and gross, but there is
cessation of formations.' Having known 'There is this,' seeing
the escape from that, the Tathagata has gone beyond that.

13. "Bhikkhus, any recluses or brahmins who speculate about
the future and hold views about the future, who assert various
doctrinal propositions concerning the future, all assert these five
bases or a certain one among them. 949

(speculations about the past)

14. "Bhikkhus, there are some recluses and brahmins who spec-
ulate about the past and hold views about the past, who assert
various doctrinal propositions concerning the past.

(1) Some assert thus: 'The self and the world are eternal: only
this is true, anything else is wrong.' 950

(2) Some assert thus: 'The self and the world are not eternal:
only this is true, anything else is wrong.' 951


ii 234


The Five and Three 843


(3) Some assert thus: 'The self and the world are both eternal
and not eternal: only this is true, anything else is wrong.' 952

(4) Some assert thus: 'The self and the world are neither eter-
nal nor not eternal: only this is true, anything else is wrong.' 953

(5) Some assert thus: 'The self and the world are finite: only
this is true, anything else is wrong.' 954

(6) Some assert thus: "The self and the world are infinite: only
this is true, anything else is wrong.'

(7) Some assert thus: 'The self and the world are both finite
and infinite: only this is true, anything else is wrong.'

(8) Some assert thus: 'The self and the world are neither finite
nor infinite: only this is true, anything else is wrong.'

(9) Some assert thus: 'The self and the world are percipient of
unity: only this is true, anything else is wrong.' 955

(10) Some assert thus: 'The self and the world are percipient of
diversity: only this is true, anything else is wrong.'

(11) Some assert thus: 'The self and the world are percipient of
the limited: only this is true, anything else is wrong.'

(12) Some assert thus: 'The self and the world are percipient of
the immeasurable: only this is true, anything else is wrong.'

(13) Some assert thus: 'The self and the world [experience]
exclusively pleasure: only this is true, anything else is wrong.'

(14) Some assert thus: 'The self and the world [experience]
exclusively pain: only this is true, anything else is wrong.' [234]

(15) Some assert thus: 'The self and the world [experience] both
pleasure and pain: only this is true, anything else is wrong.'

(16) Some assert thus: 'The self and the world [experience] nei-
ther pleasure nor pain: only this is true, anything else is wrong.'

15. (1) "Therein, bhikkhus, as to those recluses and brahmins
who hold such a doctrine and view as this: 'The self and the
world are eternal: only this is true, anything else is wrong,' that
apart from faith, apart from approval, apart from oral tradition,
apart from reasoned cogitation, apart from reflective acceptance
of a view, they will have any pure and clear personal knowledge
of this - that is impossible. 956 Since they have no pure and clear
personal knowledge, even the mere fragmentary knowledge
that those good recluses and brahmins clarify [about their view]
is declared to be clinging on their part. 957 That is conditioned
and gross, but there is cessation of formations. Having known


ii 235


844 Pancattaya Sutta: Sutta 102


'There is this/ seeing the escape from that, the Tathagata has
gone beyond that.

16. (2-16) "Therein, bhikkhus, as to those recluses and brah-
mins who hold such a doctrine and view as this: 'The self and
the world are not eternal... both eternal and not eternal... nei-
ther eternal nor not eternal... finite... infinite... both finite and
infinite... neither finite nor infinite... percipient of unity... per-
cipient of diversity. . .percipient of the limited. . .percipient of the
immeasurable. . . [experience] exclusively pleasure. . . [experience]
exclusively pain... [experience] both pleasure and pain... [expe-
rience] neither pleasure nor pain: only this is true, anything else
is wrong/ that apart from faith, apart from approval, apart
from oral tradition, apart from reasoned cogitation, apart from
reflective acceptance of a view, they will have any pure and
clear personal knowledge of this - that is impossible. [235]
Since they have no pure and clear personal knowledge, even
the mere fragmentary knowledge that those good recluses and
brahmins clarify [about their view] is declared to be clinging on
their part. That is conditioned and gross, but there is cessation of
formations. Having known 'There is this,' seeing the escape
from that, the Tathagata has gone beyond that. 958

(nibbana here and now ) 959

17, (V) "Here, bhikkhus, 960 some recluse or brahmin, with the
relinquishing of views about the past and the future and
through complete lack of resolve upon the fetters of sensual
pleasure, enters upon and abides in the rapture of seclusion. 961
He thinks: 'This is the peaceful, this is the sublime, that I enter
upon and abide in the rapture of seclusion.' That rapture of
seclusion ceases in him. With the cessation of the rapture of
seclusion, grief arises, and with the cessation of grief, the rap-
ture of seclusion arises. 962 Just as the sunlight pervades the area
that the shadow leaves, and the shadow pervades the area that
the sunlight leaves, so too, with the cessation of the rapture of
seclusion, grief arises, and with the cessation of grief, the rap-
ture of seclusion arises.

18. "The Tathagata, bhikkhus, understands this thus: 'This
good recluse or brahmin, with the relinquishing of views about
the past and the future... and with the cessation of grief, the


ii 236


The Five and Three 845


rapture of seclusion arises. That is conditioned and gross, but
there is cessation of formations/ Having known 'There is this/
seeing the escape from that, the Tathagata has gone beyond that.

19. "Here, bhikkhus, some recluse or brahmin, with the relin-
quishing of views about the past and the future, through com-
plete lack of resolve upon the fetters of sensual pleasure, and
with the surmounting of the rapture of seclusion, enters upon
and abides in unworldly pleasure. 963 He thinks: 'This is the
peaceful, this is the sublime, that I enter upon and abide in
unworldly pleasure.' That unworldly pleasure ceases in him.
With the cessation of unworldly pleasure, the rapture of seclu-
sion arises, and with the cessation of the rapture of seclusion,
unworldly pleasure arises. [236] Just as the sunlight pervades
the area that the shadow leaves, and the shadow pervades the
area that the sunlight leaves, so too, with the cessation of
unworldly pleasure, the rapture of seclusion arises and with the
cessation of the rapture of seclusion, unworldly pleasure arises.

20. "The Tathagata, bhikkhus, understands this thus: 'This
good recluse or brahmin, with the relinquishing of views about
the past and the future. . .and with the cessation of the rapture of
seclusion, unworldly pleasure arises. That is conditioned and
gross, but there is cessation of formations.' Having known
'There is this,' seeing the escape from that, the Tathagata has
gone beyond that.

21. "Here, bhikkhus, some recluse or brahmin, with the relin-
quishing of views about the past and the future, through com-
plete lack of resolve upon the fetters of sensual pleasure, and
with the surmounting of the rapture of seclusion and unworldly
pleasure, enters upon and abides in neither-painful-nor-pleasant
feeling. 964 He thinks: 'This is the peaceful, this is the sublime,
that I enter upon and abide in neither-painful-nor-pleasant feel-
ing.' That neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling ceases in him.
With the cessation of neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling,
unworldly pleasure arises, and with the cessation of unworldly
pleasure, neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling arises. Just as the
sunlight pervades the area that the shadow leaves, and the
shadow pervades the area that the sunlight leaves, so too, with
the cessation of neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, unworldly
pleasure arises, and with the cessation of unworldly pleasure,
neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling arises.


ii 238


846 Pancattaya Sutta: Suita 102


22. "The Tathagata, bhikkhus / understands this thus: 'This
good recluse or brahmin, with the relinquishing of views about
the past and the future... [237]... and with the cessation of
unworldly pleasure, neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling arises.
That is conditioned and gross, but there is cessation of forma-
tions/ Having known "There is this/ seeing the escape from that,
the Tathagata has gone beyond that.

23. "Here, bhikkhus, some recluse or brahmin, with the relin-
quishing of views about the past and the future, through com-
plete lack of resolve upon the fetters of sensual pleasure, and with
the surmounting of the rapture of seclusion, unworldly pleasure,
and neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, regards himself thus: T
am at peace, I have attained Nibbana, l am without clinging.' 965

24. "The Tathagata, bhikkhus, understands this thus: 'This
good recluse or brahmin, with the relinquishing of views about
the past and the future... regards himself thus: "1 am at peace, 1
have attained Nibbana, 1 am without clinging." Certainly this
venerable one asserts the way directed to Nibbana. Yet this
good recluse or brahmin still clings, clinging either to a view
about the past or to a view about the future or to a fetter of sen-
sual pleasure or to the rapture of seclusion or to unworldly
pleasure or to neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling. And when
this venerable one regards himself thus: "I am at peace, I have
attained Nibbana, 1 am without clinging," that too is declared
to be clinging on the part of this good recluse or brahmin. 966
That is conditioned and* gross, but there is cessation of forma-
tions.' Having understood 'There is this,' seeing the escape from
that, the Tathagata has gone beyond that.

25. "Bhikkhus, this supreme state of sublime peace has been
discovered by the Tathagata, that is, liberation through not cling-
ing, 967 by understanding as they actually are the origination, the
disappearance, the gratification, the danger, and the escape in
the case of the six bases of contact. Bhikkhus, that is the supreme
state of sublime peace discovered by the Tathagata, [238], that is,
liberation through not clinging, by understanding as they actually
are the origination, the disappearance, the gratification, the dan-
ger, and the escape in the case of the six bases of contact." 968

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


103 Kinti Sutta

What Do You Think About Me?


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Kusinara, in the Grove of Offerings. There he addressed
the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir/' they replied.
The Blessed One said this:

2. "What do you think about me, bhikkhus? That the recluse
Gotama teaches the Dhamma for the sake of robes? Or that the
recluse Gotama teaches the Dhamma for the sake of almsfood?
Or that the recluse Gotama teaches the Dhamma for the sake of
a resting place? Or that the recluse Gotama teaches the Dhamma
for the sake of some better state of being?" 969

"We do not think thus about the Blessed One: 'The recluse
Gotama teaches the Dhamma for the sake of robes, or for the
sake of almsfood, or for the sake of a resting place, or for the
sake of some better state of being.'"

"So, bhikkhus, you do not think thus about me: 'The recluse
Gotama teaches the Dhamma for the sake of robes... or for the
sake of some better state of being.' Then what do you think
about me?"

"Venerable sir, we think thus about the Blessed One: 'The
Blessed One is compassionate and seeks our welfare; he teaches
the Dhamma out of compassion.'"

"So, bhikkhus, you think thus about me: 'The Blessed One is
compassionate and seeks our welfare; he teaches the Dhamma
out of compassion.'

3. "So, bhikkhus, these things that I have taught you after direct-
ly knowing them - that is, the four foundations of mindfulness,
the four right kinds of striving, the four bases for spiritual power,
the five faculties, the five powers, the seven [239] enlightenment
factors, the Noble Eightfold Path - in these things you should all
train in concord, with mutual appreciation, without disputing.


847


848 Kinti Sutta: Sutta 103


ii 240


4. "While you are training in concord, with mutual apprecia-
tion, without disputing, two bhikkhus might differ about the
higher Dhamma. 970

5. "Now if you should think thus: 'These venerable ones differ
about both the meaning and the phrasing/ 971 then whichever
bhikkhu you think is the more reasonable should be approached
and addressed thus: 'The venerable ones differ about both the
meaning and the phrasing. The venerable ones should know
that it is for this reason that there is difference about the mean-
ing and difference about the phrasing; let them not fall into a
dispute/ Then whichever bhikkhu you think is the most reason-
able of those who side together on the opposite part should be
approached and addressed thus: 'The venerable ones differ
about the meaning and the phrasing. The venerable ones should
know that it is for this reason that there is difference about the
meaning and difference about the phrasing; let them not fall into
a dispute.' So what has been wrongly grasped should be borne
in mind as wrongly grasped. Bearing in mind what has been
wrongly grasped as wrongly grasped, what is Dhamma and
what is Discipline should be expounded.

6. "Now if you should think thus: "These venerable ones differ
about the meaning but agree about the phrasing/ then whichever
bhikkhu you think is the more reasonable should be approached
and addressed thus: 'The venerable ones differ about the mean-
ing but agree about the phrasing. The venerable ones should
know that it is for this reason that there is difference about the
meaning but agreement about the phrasing; let them not fall
into a dispute.' Then whichever bhikkhu you think is the most
reasonable of those who side together on the opposite part
should be approached and addressed thus: 'The venerable ones
differ about the meaning but agree about the phrasing. The ven-
erable ones should know that it is for this reason that there is
difference about the meaning but agreement about the phrasing;
let them not fall into a dispute.' [240] So what has been wrongly
grasped should be borne in mind as wrongly grasped and what
has been rightly grasped should be borne in mind as rightly
grasped. Bearing in mind what has been wrongly grasped as
wrongly grasped, and bearing in mind what has been rightly
grasped as rightly grasped, what is Dhamma and what is
Discipline should be expounded.


ii 241


What Do You Think About Me? 849


7. "Now if you think thus: These venerable ones agree about
the meaning but differ about the phrasing/ then whichever
bhikkhu you think is the more reasonable should be approached
and addressed thus: 'The venerable ones agree about the mean-
ing but differ about the phrasing. The venerable ones should
know that it is for this reason that there is agreement about the
meaning but difference about the phrasing. But the phrasing is a
mere trifle. Let the venerable ones not fall into a dispute over a
mere trifle.' 972 Then whichever bhikkhu you think is the most
reasonable of those who side together on the opposite part
should be approached and addressed thus: 'The venerable ones
agree about the meaning but differ about the phrasing. The ven-
erable ones should know that it is for this reason that there is
agreement about the meaning but difference about the phrasing.
But the phrasing is a mere trifle. Let the venerable ones not fall
into a dispute over a mere trifle.' So what has been rightly
grasped should be borne in mind as rightly grasped and what
has been wrongly grasped should be borne in mind as wrongly
grasped. Bearing in mind what has been rightly grasped as
rightly grasped, and bearing in mind what has been wrongly
grasped as wrongly grasped, what is Dhamma and what is
Discipline should be expounded .

8. "Now if you should think thus: 'These venerable ones
agree about both the meaning and the phrasing/ then whichever
bhikkhu you think is the more reasonable should be
approached and addressed thus: 'The venerable ones agree
about both the meaning and the phrasing. The venerable ones
should know that it is for this reason that there is agreement
about both the meaning and the phrasing; let the venerable
ones not fall into a dispute.' Then whichever bhikkhu you think
is the most reasonable of those who side together on the oppo-
site part should be approached and addressed thus: 'The vener-
able ones agree about both the meaning and the phrasing. The
venerable ones should know that it is for this reason that there
is agreement about both the meaning and the phrasing; let the
venerable ones not [241] fall into a dispute.' So what has been
rightly grasped should be borne in mind as rightly grasped.
Bearing in mind what has been rightly grasped as rightly
grasped, what is Dhamma and what is Discipline should be
expounded.


850 Kinti Sutta: Sutta 103


ii 242


9. "While you are training in concord, with mutual apprecia-
tion, without disputing, some bhikkhu might commit an offence
or a transgression. 973

10. "Now, bhikkhus, you should not hurry to reprove him;
rather, the person should be examined thus: 'I shall not be trou-
bled and the other person will not be hurt; for the other person
is not given to anger and revenge, he is not firmly attached to
his view and he relinquishes easily, and I can make that person
emerge from the unwholesome and establish him in the whole-
some.' If such occurs to you, bhikkhus, it is proper to speak.

11. "Then it may occur to you, bhikkhus: 'I shall not be trou-
bled, but the other person will be hurt, for the other person is
given to anger and revenge. However, he is not firmly attached
to his view and he relinquishes easily, and I can make that per-
son emerge from the unwholesome and establish him in the
wholesome. It is a mere trifle that the other person will be hurt,
but it is a much greater thing that I can make that person emerge
from the unwholesome and establish him in the wholesome.' If
such occurs to you, bhikkhus, it is proper to speak.

12. "Then it may occur to you, bhikkhus: 'I shall be troubled,
but the other person will not be hurt; for the other person is not
given to anger and revenge, though he is firmly attached to his
view and he relinquishes with difficulty; yet I can make that
person emerge from the unwholesome and establish him in the
wholesome. It is a mere trifle that I shall be troubled, but it is a
much greater thing that I can make that person emerge from the
unwholesome and establish him in the wholesome.' If such
occurs to you, bhikkhus, it is proper to speak.

13. "Then it may occur to you, bhikkhus: 'I shall be troubled
and the other person will be hurt; [242] for the other person is
given to anger and revenge, and he is firmly attached to his view
and he relinquishes with difficulty; yet I can make that person
emerge from the unwholesome and establish him in the whole-
some. It is a mere trifle that I shall be troubled and the other per-
son hurt, but it is a much greater thing that I can make that per-
son emerge from the unwholesome and establish him in the
wholesome.' If such occurs to you, bhikkhus, it is proper to speak.

14. "Then it may occur to you, bhikkhus: 'I shall be troubled
and the other person will be hurt; for the other person is given
to anger and revenge, and he is firmly attached to his view and


ii 243


What Do You Think About Me? 851


he relinquishes with difficulty; and I cannot make that person
emerge from the unwholesome and establish him in the
wholesome/ One should not underrate equanimity towards
such a person.

15. "While you are training in concord, with mutual apprecia-
tion, without disputing, there might arise mutual verbal friction,
domineering views, mental annoyance, bitterness, and dejection.
Then whichever bhikkhu you think is the most reasonable of
those who side together on the one part should be approached
and addressed thus: 'While we were training in concord, friend,
with mutual appreciation, without disputing, there arose mutual
verbal friction, domineering views, mental annoyance, bitter-
ness, and dejection. If the Recluse knew, would he censure
that?' 974 Answering rightly, the bhikkhu would answer thus:
'While we were training... If the Recluse knew, he would cen-
sure that.'

"'But, friend, without abandoning that thing, can one realise
Nibbana?' Answering rightly, the bhikkhu would answer thus:
'Friend, without abandoning that thing, one cannot realise
Nibbana.' 975

16. "Then whichever bhikkhu you think is the most reason-
able of those who side together on the opposite part should be
approached and addressed thus: 'While we were training in
concord, friend, with mutual appreciation, without disputing,
there arose mutual verbal friction, domineering views, mental
annoyance, bitterness, and dejection. If the Recluse knew, would
he censure that?' Answering rightly, the bhikkhu would answer
thus: 'While we were training... If the Recluse knew, he would
censure that.'

"'But, friend, without abandoning that thing, can one realise
Nibbana?' Answering rightly, the bhikkhu would answer thus:
[243] 'Friend, without abandoning that thing, one cannot realise
Nibbana.'

17. "If others should ask that bhikkhu thus: 'Was it the venera-
ble one who made those bhikkhus emerge from the unwholesome
and established them in the wholesome?' answering rightly, the
bhikkhu would answer thus: 'Here, friends, I went to the Blessed
One. The Blessed One taught me the Dhamma. Having heard
that Dhamma, I spoke to those bhikkhus. The bhikkhus heard
that Dhamma, and they emerged from the unwholesome and



852 Kinti Sutta: Sutta 103


ii 243


became established in the wholesome.' Answering thus, the
bhikkhu neither exalts himself nor disparages others; he
answers in accordance with the Dhamma in such a way that
nothing which provides a ground for censure can be legitimately
deduced from his assertion."

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


104 Samagama Sutta
At Samagama


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing in the Sakyan country at Samagama.

2. Now on that occasion the Nigantha Nataputta had just died
at Pava. 976 On his death the Niganthas divided, split into two;
and they had taken to quarrelling and brawling and were deep
in disputes, stabbing each other with verbal daggers: "You do
not understand this Dhamma and Discipline. I understand this
Dhamma and Discipline. How could you understand this
Dhamma and Discipline? Your way is wrong. My way is right. I
am consistent. You are inconsistent. What should have been said
first [244] you said last. What should have been said last you
said first. What you had so carefully thought up has been turned
inside out. Your assertion has been shown up. You are refuted.
Go and learn better, or disentangle yourself if you can!" It
seemed as if there were nothing but slaughter among the
Nigantha Nataputta's pupils. And his white-clothed lay disci-
ples were disgusted, dismayed, and disappointed with the
Nigantha Nataputta's pupils, as they were with his badly pro-
claimed and badly expounded Dhamma and Discipline, which
was unemancipating, unconducive to peace, expounded by one
not fully enlightened, and was now with its shrine broken, left
without a refuge. 977

3. Then the novice Cunda, 978 who had spent the Rains at Pava,
went to the venerable Ananda, and after paying homage to him,
he sat down at one side and told him what was taking place.

The venerable Ananda then said to the novice Cunda: "Friend
Cunda, this is news that should be told to the Blessed One.
Come, let us approach the Blessed One and tell him this."

"Yes, venerable sir," the novice Cunda replied.


853


854 Samagama Sutta: Sutta 104


ii 246


4. Then the venerable Ananda and the novice Cunda went
together to the Blessed One. After paying homage to him, they
sat down at one side, and [245] the venerable Ananda said to the
Blessed One: "This novice Cunda, venerable sir, says thus:
'Venerable sir, the Nigantha Nataputta has just died. On his
death the Niganthas divided, split into two... and is now with its
shrine broken, left without a refuge.' I thought, venerable sir: 'Let
no dispute arise in the Sangha when the Blessed One has gone.
For such a dispute would be for the harm and unhappiness of
many, for the loss, harm, and suffering of gods and humans.'"

5. "What do you think, Ananda? These things that I have
taught you after directly knowing them - that is, the four foun-
dations of mindfulness, the four right kinds of striving, the four
bases for spiritual power, the five faculties, the five powers, the
seven enlightenment factors, the Noble Eightfold Path - do you
see, Ananda, even two bhikkhus who make differing assertions
about these things?"

"No, venerable sir, I do not see even two bhikkhus who make
differing assertions about these things. But, venerable sir, there
are people who live deferential towards the Blessed One who
might, when he has gone, create a dispute in the Sangha about
livelihood and about the Patimokkha 979 Such a dispute would
be for the harm and unhappiness of many, for the loss, harm,
and suffering of gods and humans."

"A dispute about livelihood or about the Patimokkha would
be trifling, Ananda. But should a dispute arise in the Sangha
about the path or the way, 980 such a dispute would be for the
harm and unhappiness of many, for the loss, harm, and suffer-
ing of gods and humans.

6. "There are, Ananda, these six roots of disputes. 981 What six?
Here, Ananda, a bhikkhu is angry and revengeful. Such a
bhikkhu dwells disrespectful and undeferential towards the
Teacher, towards the Dhamma, and towards the Sangha, and he
does not fulfil the training. A bhikkhu who dwells disrespectful
and undeferential towards the Teacher, towards the Dhamma,
and towards the Sangha, [246] and who does not fulfil the train-
ing, creates a dispute in the Sangha, which would be for the
harm and unhappiness of many, for the loss, harm, and suffering
of gods and humans. Now if you see any such root of dispute
either in yourselves or externally, you should strive to abandon


ii 247


At Samagama 855


that same evil root of dispute. And if you do not see any such
root of dispute either in yourselves or externally, you should
practise in such a way that that same evil root of dispute does
not erupt in the future. Thus there is the abandoning of that evil
root of dispute; thus there is the non-eruption of that evil root of
dispute in the future.

7-11. "Again, a bhikkhu is contemptuous and domineering...
envious and avaricious... deceitful and fraudulent... has evil
wishes and wrong view... adheres to his own views, holds on to
them tenaciously, and relinquishes them with difficulty. Such a
bhikkhu dwells disrespectful and undeferential towards the
Teacher, towards the Dhamma, and towards the Sangha, and he
does not fulfil the training. A bhikkhu who dwells disrespectful
and undeferential towards the Teacher, towards the Dhamma,
and towards the Sangha, and who does not fulfil the training,
creates a dispute in the Sangha, which would be for the harm
and unhappiness of many, for the loss, harm, and suffering of
gods and humans. Now if you see any such root of dispute
either in yourselves or externally, you should strive to abandon
that same evil root of dispute. And if you do not see any such
root of dispute either in yourselves or externally, you should
practise in such a way that that same evil root of dispute does
not erupt in the future. [247] Thus there is the abandoning of that
evil root of dispute; thus there is the non-eruption of that evil
root of dispute in the future. These are the six roots of dispute.

12. "Ananda, there are these four kinds of litigation. What
four? Litigation because of a dispute, litigation because of an
accusation, litigation because of an offence, and litigation con-
cerning proceedings. These are the four kinds of litigation. 982

13. "Ananda, there are these seven kinds of settlement of liti-
gation. 983 For the settlement and pacification of litigations when-
ever they arise: removal of litigation by confrontation may be
provided, removal of litigation on account of memory may be
provided, removal of litigation on account of past insanity may
be provided, the effecting of acknowledgement of an offence,
the opinion of the majority, the pronouncement of bad character
against someone, and covering over with grass.

14. "And how is there removal of litigation by confronta-
tion? 984 Here bhikkhus are disputing: 'It is Dhamma/ or 'It is not
Dhamma,' or 'It is Discipline,' or 'It is not Discipline.' Those


856 Samagama Sutta: Sutta 104


ii 248


bhikkhus should all meet together in concord. Then, having met
together, the guideline of the Dhamma should be drawn out. 985
Once the guideline of the Dhamma has been drawn out, that liti-
gation should be settled in a way that accords with it. Such is the
removal of litigation by confrontation. And so there comes to be
the settlement of some litigations here by removal of litigation
by confrontation.

15. "And how is there the opinion of a majority? If those
bhikkhus cannot settle that litigation in that dwelling place, they
should go to a dwelling place where there is a greater number of
bhikkhus. There they should all meet together in concord. Then,
having met together, the guideline of the Dhamma should be
drawn out. Once the guideline of the Dhamma has been drawn
out, that litigation should be settled in a way that accords with it.
Such is the opinion of a majority. And so there comes to be the
settlement of some litigations here by the opinion of a majority.

16. "And how is there removal of litigation on account of
memory? 986 Here one bhikkhu reproves another bhikkhu for
such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or border-
ing on defeat: 987 'Does the venerable one remember having com-
mitted such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or
bordering on defeat?' He says: 'I do not, friends, remember hav-
ing committed such and such a grave offence, one involving
defeat or bordering on defeat.' [248] In his case removal of litiga-
tion on account of memory should be pronounced. Such is the
removal of litigation oq account of memory. And so there comes
to be the settlement of some litigations here by removal of litiga-
tion on account of memory.

17. "And how is there removal of litigation on account of past
insanity? 988 Here one bhikkhu reproves another bhikkhu for such
and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on
defeat: 'Does the venerable one remember having committed
such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering
on defeat?' He says: 'I do not, friends, remember having com-
mitted such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or
bordering on defeat.' Despite the denial, the former presses the
latter further: 'Surely the venerable one must know quite well if
he remembers having committed such and such a grave offence,
one involving defeat or bordering on defeat?' He says: 'I had
gone mad, friend, I was out of my mind, and when I was mad I


ii 249


At Samagama 857


said and did many things improper for a recluse. I do not
remember, I was mad when I did that.' In his case removal of lit-
igation on account of past insanity should be pronounced. Such
is the removal of litigation on account of past insanity. And so
there comes to be the settlement of some litigations here by
removal of litigation on account of past insanity.

18. "And how is there the effecting of acknowledgement of an
offence? Here a bhikkhu, whether reproved or unreproved,
remembers an offence, reveals it, and discloses it. He should go
to a senior bhikkhu, and after arranging his robe on one shoul-
der, he should pay homage at his feet. Then, sitting on his heels,
he should raise his hands palms together and say: 'Venerable
sir, I have committed such and such an offence; I confess it.' The
other says: 'Do you sj?e?' - 'Yes, I see.' - 'Will you practise
restraint in the future?' - 'I will practise restraint in the future.'
Such is the effecting of acknowledgement of an offence. 989 And
so there comes to be the settlement of some litigations here by
the effecting of acknowledgement of an offence. [249]

19. "And how is there the pronouncement of bad character
against someone? 990 Here one bhikkhu reproves another for such
and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on
defeat: 'Does the venerable one remember having committed
such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering
on defeat?' He says: 'I do not, friends, remember having commit-
ted such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bor-
dering on defeat.' Despite the denial, the former presses the latter
further: 'Surely the venerable one must know quite well if he
remembers having committed such and such a grave offence,
one involving defeat or bordering on defeat?' He says: 'I do not,
friends, remember having committed such and such a grave
offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat. But,
friends, I remember having committed such and such a minor
offence,' Despite the denial, the former presses the latter further:
'Surely the venerable one must know quite well if he remembers
having committed such and such a grave offence, one involving
defeat or bordering on defeat?' He says: 'Friends, when not asked
I acknowledge having committed this minor offence; so when
asked, why shouldn't I acknowledge having committed such and
such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bordering on
defeat?' The other says: 'Friend, if you had not been asked, you



858 Samagama Sutta: Sutta 104


ii 250


would not have acknowledged committing this minor offence;
so why, when asked, would you acknowledge having commit-
ted such and such a grave offence, one involving defeat or bor-
dering on defeat? Surely the venerable one must know quite
well if he remembers having committed such and such a grave
offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat?' He says: 'I
remember, friends, having committed such and such a grave
offence, one involving defeat or bordering on defeat. I was hur-
ried, I was confused, when I said that I did not remember hav-
ing committed such and such a grave offence, one involving
defeat or bordering on defeat.' Such is the pronouncement of
bad character against someone. And so there comes to be the
settlement of some litigations here by the pronouncement of bad
character against someone. [250]

20. "And how is there covering over with grass? 991 Here when
bhikkhus have taken to quarreling and brawling and are deep in
disputes, they may have said and done many things improper
for a recluse. Those bhikkhus should all meet together in con-
cord. When they have met together, a wise bhikkhu among the
bhikkhus who side together on the one part should rise from his
seat, and after arranging his robe on one shoulder, he should
raise his hands, palms together, and call for an enactment of the
Sangha thus: 'Let the venerable Sangha hear me. When we took
to quarreling and brawling and were deep in disputes, we said
and did many things improper for a recluse. If it is approved by
the Sangha, then for the good of these venerable ones and for
my own good, in the midst of the Sangha I shall confess, by the
method of covering over with grass, any offences of these vener-
able ones and any offences of my own, except for those which
call for serious censure and those connected with the laity.' 992

"Then a wise bhikkhu among the bhikkhus who side together
on the other part should rise from his seat, and after arranging
his robe on one shoulder, he should raise his hands, palms
together, and call for an enactment of the Sangha thus: 'Let the
venerable Sangha hear me. When we took to quarreling and
brawling and were deep in disputes, we said and did many
things improper for a recluse. If it is approved by the Sangha,
then for the good of these venerable ones and for my own good,
in the midst of the Sangha I shall confess, by the method of cov-
ering over with grass, any offences of these venerable ones and


ii 251


At Samagama 859


any offences of my own, except for those which call for serious
censure and those connected with the laity.' Such is the covering
over with grass. And so there comes to be the settlement of
some litigations here by the covering over with grass.

21. "Ananda, there are these six memorable qualities that cre-
ate love and respect, and conduce to helpfulness, to non-dispute,
to concord, and to unity. 993 What are the six?

"Here a bhikkhu maintains bodily acts of loving-kindness
both in public and in private towards his companions in the
holy life. This is a memorable quality that creates love and
respect, and conduces to helpfulness, to non-dispute, to con-
cord, and to unity.

"Again, a bhikkhu maintains verbal acts of loving-kindness
both in public and in private towards his companions in the
holy life. This is a memorable quality that creates love and
respect, and conduces to. . .unity.

"Again, a bhikkhu maintains mental acts of loving-kindness
both in public and in private towards his companions in the
holy life. This is a memorable quality that creates love [251] and
respect, and conduces to. . .unity.

"Again, a bhikkhu enjoys things in common with his virtuous
companions in the holy life; without making reservations, he
shares with them any gain of a kind that accords with the
Dhamma and has been obtained in a way that accords with the
Dhamma, including even what is in his bowl. This is a memo-
rable quality that creates love and respect, and conduces
to... unity.

"Again, a bhikkhu dwells both in public and in private pos-
sessing in common with his companions in the holy life those
virtues that are unbroken, untorn, unblotched, unmottled, lib-
erating, commended by the wise, not misapprehended, arid
conducive to concentration. This too is a memorable quality
that creates love and respect and conduces to... unity.

"Again, a bhikkhu dwells both in public and in private pos-
sessing in common with his companions in the holy life that
view that is noble and emancipating, and leads the one who
practises in accordance with it to the complete destruction of
suffering. This too is a memorable quality that creates love and
respect, and conduces to helpfulness, to non-dispute, to con-
cord, and to unity.


860 Samagama Sutta: Sutta 104


ii 251


"These are the six memorable qualities that create love and
respect, and conduce to helpfulness, to non-dispute, to concord,
and to unity.

22. "If, Ananda, you undertake and maintain these six memo-
rable qualities, do you see any course of speech, trivial or gross,
that you could not endure?" 994 - "No, venerable sir." -
"Therefore, Ananda, undertake and maintain these six memo-
rable qualities. That will lead to your welfare and happiness for
a long time."

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Ananda was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


105 Sunakkhatta Sutta
To Sunakkhatta


[252] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One
was living at Vesall in the Great Wood in the Hall with the
Peaked Roof.

2. Now on that occasion a number of bhikkhus had declared
final knowledge in the presence of the Blessed One thus: "We
understand: Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what
had to be done has been done, there is no more coming to any
state of being."

3. Sunakkhatta, son of the Licchavis, 995 heard: "A number of
bhikkhus, it seems, have declared final knowledge in the pres-
ence of the Blessed One thus: 'We understand: Birth is destroyed
...there is no more coming to any state of being.'" Then
Sunakkhatta, son of the Licchavis, went to the Blessed One, and
after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and said to
the Blessed One:

4. "I have heard, venerable sir, that a number of bhikkhus have
declared final knowledge in the presence of the Blessed One. Did
they do so rightly or are there some bhikkhus here who declare
final knowledge because they overestimate themselves?"

5. "When those bhikkhus, Sunakkhatta, declared final knowl-
edge in my presence, there were some bhikkhus who declared
final knowledge rightly and there were some who declared final
knowledge because they overestimated themselves. 996 Therein,
when bhikkhus declare final knowledge rightly, their declara-
tion is true. But when bhikkhus declare final knowledge because
they overestimate themselves, the Tathagata thinks: 'Let me
teach them the Dhamma.' 997 Thus it is in this case, Sunakkhatta,
that the Tathagata thinks: 'Let me teach them the Dhamma.' But
some misguided men here formulate a question, come to the
Tathagata, and ask it. In that case, Sunakkhatta, [253] though the


861


862 Sunakkhatta Sutta: Sutta 105


ii254


Tathagata has thought: 'Let me teach them the Dhamma,' he
changes his mind." 998

6. "This is the time. Blessed One, this is the time. Sublime One,
for the Blessed One to teach the Dhamma. Having heard it from
the Blessed One, the bhikkhus will remember it."

"Then listen, Sunakkhatta, and attend closely to what I shall
say."

"Yes, venerable sir," Sunakkhatta, son of the Licchavis, replied
to the Blessed One. The Blessed One said this:

7. "There are, Sunakkhatta, these five cords of sensual plea-
sure. What are the five? Forms cognizable by the eye that are
wished for, desired, agreeable, and likeable, connected with
sensual desire and provocative of lust. Sounds cognizable by
the ear... Odours cognizable by the nose... Flavours cognizable
by the tongue. ..Tangibles cognizable by the body that are
wished for, desired, agreeable, and likeable, connected with
sensual desire and provocative of lust. These are the five cords
of sensual pleasure.

8. "It is possible, Sunakkhatta, that some person here may be
intent on worldly material things. 999 When a person is intent on
worldly material things, only talk concerning that interests him,
and his thinking and pondering are in line with that, and he
associates with that kind of person, and he finds satisfaction
through him. But when talk about the imperturbable is going
on, he will not listen to it or give it ear or exert his mind to
understand it. He doeg not associate with that kind of person,
and he does not find satisfaction through him.

9. "Suppose, Sunakkhatta, a man had left his own village or
town a long time ago, and he were to see another man who had
only recently left that village or town. He would ask that man
whether the people of that village or town were safe, prosper-
ous, and healthy, and that man would tell him whether the peo-
ple of that village or town were safe, prosperous, [254] and
healthy. What do you think, Sunakkhatta? Would that first man
listen to him, give him ear, and exert his mind to understand?" -
"Yes, venerable sir." - "So too, Sunakkhatta, it is possible that
some person here may be intent on worldly material things-
When a person is intent on worldly material things... and he
does not find satisfaction through him. He should be under-
stood as a person who is intent on worldly material things.


ii 255


To Sunakkhatta 863


10. "It is possible, Sunakkhatta, that some person here may be
intent on the imperturbable. 1000 When a person is intent on the
imperturbable, only talk concerning that interests him, and his
thinking and pondering are in line with that, and he associates
with that kind of person, and he finds satisfaction through him.
But when talk about worldly material things is going on, he will
not listen to it or give it ear or exert his mind to understand it.
He does not associate with that kind of person, and he does not
find satisfaction through him.

11. "Just as a yellow leaf that has fallen from its stalk is inca-
pable of becoming green again, so too, Sunakkhatta, when a
person is intent on the imperturbable he has shed the fetter of
worldly material things. He should be understood as a person
not bound by the fetter of worldly material things who is intent
on the imperturbable.

12. "It is possible, Sunakkhatta, that some person here may be
intent on the base of nothingness. When a person is intent on the
base of nothingness, only talk concerning that interests him, and
his thinking and pondering are in line with that, and he associ-
ates with that kind of person, and he finds satisfaction through
him. [255] But when talk about the imperturbable is going on, he
will not listen to it or give it ear or exert his mind to understand
it. He does not associate with that kind of person, and he does
not find satisfaction through him.

13. "Just as a thick stone that has split in two cannot be joined
together again, so too, Sunakkhatta, when a person is intent on
the base of nothingness his fetter of the imperturbable has been
split. He should be understood as a person not bound by the
fetter of the imperturbable who is intent on the base of nothing-
ness.

14. "It is possible, Sunakkhatta, that some person here may be
intent on the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
When a person is intent on the base of neither-perception-nor-
non-perception, only talk concerning that interests him, and his
thinking and pondering are in line with that, and he associates
with that kind of person, and he finds satisfaction through him.
But when talk about the base of nothingness is going on, he will
not listen to it or give it ear or exert his mind to understand it.
He does not associate with that kind of person, and he does not
find satisfaction through him.


864 Sunakkhatta Sutta: Sutta 105


ii 256


15. "Suppose a person has eaten some delicious food and
thrown it up. What do you think, Sunakkhatta? Could that man
have any desire to eat that food again?"

"No, venerable sir. Why is that? Because that food is consid-
ered repulsive."

"So too, Sunakkhatta, when a person is intent on the base of
neither-perception-nor-non-perception, his fetter of the base of
nothingness has been rejected. He should be understood as a
person not bound by the fetter of the base of nothingness who is
intent on the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.

16. "It is possible, Sunakkhatta, that some person here may be
completely intent on Nibbana. When a person is completely
intent on Nibbana, only talk concerning that interests him, and
his thinking and pondering are in line with that, and he associ-
ates with that kind of person, and he finds satisfaction through
him. But when talk about the base of neither-perception-nor-
non-perception is going on, [256] he will not listen to it or give it
ear or exert his mind to understand it. He does not associate
with that kind of person, and he does not find satisfaction
through him.

17. "Just as a palm tree with its top cut off is incapable of
growing again, so too, Sunakkhatta, when a person is complete-
ly intent on Nibbana, his fetter of the base of neither-perception-
nor-non-perception has been cut off - cut off at the root, made
like a palm stump, done away with so that it is no longer subject
to future arising. He should be understood as a person not
bound by the fetter of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-
perception who is completely intent on Nibbana.

18. "It is possible, Sunakkhatta, that some bhikkhu here might
think thus: 'Craving has been called an arrow by the Recluse; 1001
the poisonous humour of ignorance is spread about by desire,
lust, and ill will. That arrow of craving has been removed from
me; the poisonous humour of ignorance has been expelled. I am
one who is completely intent on Nibbana.' Because he falsely
thinks of himself thus, 1002 he might pursue those things that are
unsuitable for one completely intent on Nibbana. He might pur-
sue the sight of unsuitable forms with the eye, he might pursue
unsuitable sounds with the ear, unsuitable odours with the
nose, unsuitable flavours with the tongue, unsuitable tangibles
with the body, or unsuitable mind-objects with the mind. When


ii 258


To Sunakkhatta 865


he pursues the sight of unsuitable forms with the eye... unsuit-
able mind-objects with the mind, lust invades his mind. With his
mind invaded by lust, he would incur death or deadly suffering.

19. "Suppose, Sunakkhatta, a man were wounded by an
arrow thickly smeared with poison, and his friends and com-
panions, his kinsmen and relatives, brought a surgeon. The sur-
geon would cut around the opening of the wound with a knife,
then he would probe for the arrow with a probe, [257] then he
would pull out the arrow and would expel the poisonous
humour, leaving a trace of it behind. Knowing that a trace was
left behind, 1003 he would say: 'Good man, the arrow has been
pulled out from you; the poisonous humour has been expelled
with a trace left behind, but it is incapable of harming you. Eat
only suitable food; do not eat unsuitable food or else the wound
may suppurate. From time to time wash the wound and from
time to time anoint its opening, so that pus and blood do not
cover the opening of the wound. Do not walk around in the
wind and sun or else dust and dirt may infect the opening of
the wound. Take care of your wound, good man, and see to it
that the wound heals.'

20. "The man would think: 'The arrow has been pulled out
from me; the poisonous humour has been expelled with no trace
left behind, and it is incapable of harming me.' He would eat
unsuitable food, and the wound would suppurate. He would
not wash the wound from time to time nor would he anoint its
opening from time to time, and pus and blood would cover the
opening of the wound. He would walk around in the wind and
sun, and dust and dirt would infect the opening of the wound.
He would not take care of his wound, nor would he see to it that
the wound heals. Then, both because he does what is unsuitable
and because the foul poisonous humour had been expelled with
a trace left behind, the wound would swell, and with its
swelling he would incur death or deadly suffering.

21. "So too, Sunakkhatta, it is possible that some bhikkhu here
might think thus: 'Craving has been called an arrow by the
Recluse; the poisonous humour of ignorance is spread about by
desire, lust, and ill will. That arrow of craving has been removed
from me; [258] the poisonous humour of ignorance has been
expelled. I am completely intent upon Nibbana.' Because he
falsely thinks of himself thus, he might pursue those things that


866 Sunakkhatta Sutta: Sutta 105


ii 259


are unsuitable for one completely intent on Nibbana. ..(as
above)... With his mind invaded by lust, he would incur death or
deadly suffering.

22. "For it is death in the Discipline of the Noble One, Sunak-
khatta, when one abandons the training and reverts to the low
life; and it is deadly suffering when one commits some defiled
offence. 1004

23. "It is possible, Sunakkhatta, that some bhikkhu here might
think thus: 'Craving has been called an arrow by the Recluse;
the poisonous humour of ignorance is spread about by desire,
lust, and ill will. That arrow of craving has been removed from
me; the poisonous humour of ignorance has been expelled. I am
one who is completely intent on Nibbana.' Being one who really
is completely intent on Nibbana, he would not pursue those
things that are unsuitable for one completely intent on Nibbana.
He would not pursue the sight of unsuitable forms with the eye,
he would not pursue unsuitable sounds with the ear, unsuitable
odours with the nose, unsuitable flavours with the tongue,
unsuitable tangibles with the body, or unsuitable mind-objects
with the mind. Because he does not pursue the sight of unsuit-
able forms with the eye... unsuitable mind-objects with the mind,
lust does not invade his mind. [259] Because his mind is not
invaded by lust, he would not incur death or deadly suffering.

24. "Suppose, Sunakkhatta, a man were wounded by an arrow
thickly smeared with poison, and his friends and companions,
his kinsmen and relatives, brought a surgeon. The surgeon
would cut around the opening of the wound with a knife, then
he would probe for the arrow with a probe, then he would pull
out the arrow and would expel the poisonous humour without
leaving a trace of it behind. Knowing that no trace was left
behind, he would say: 'Good man, the arrow has been pulled
out from you; the poisonous humour has been expelled with no
trace left behind, and it is incapable of harming you. Eat only
suitable food; do not eat unsuitable food or else the wound may
suppurate. From time to time wash the wound and from time to
time anoint its opening, so that pus and blood do not cover the
opening of the wound. Do not walk around in the wind and
sun or else dust and dirt may infect the opening of the wound.
Take care of your wound, good man, and see to it that the
wound heals.'


ii 260


To Sunakkhatta 867


25. "The man would think: 'The arrow has been pulled out
from me; the poisonous humour has been expelled with no trace
left behind, and it is incapable of harming me.' He would eat
only suitable food, and the wound would not suppurate. From
time to time he would wash the wound and from time to time
he would anoint its opening, and pus and blood would not
cover the opening of the wound. He would not walk around in
the wind and sun, and dust and dirt would not infect the open-
ing of the wound. He would take care of his wound and would
see to it that the wound heals. Then, both because he does what
is suitable and because the foul poisonous humour has been
expelled with no trace left behind, the wound would heal, and
because it had healed and was covered with skin, he would not
incur death or deadly suffering.

26. "So too, Sunakkhatta, it is possible that some bhikkhus
here might think thus: 'Craving has been called an arrow by the
Recluse; [260] the poisonous humour of ignorance is spread
about by desire, lust, and ill will. That arrow of craving has been
pulled out from me; the poisonous humour of ignorance has
been expelled. I am one who is completely intent on Nibbana.'
Being one who really is completely intent on Nibbana, he would
not pursue those things unsuitable for one completely intent on
Nibbana ... (as above )... Because his mind is not invaded by lust,
he would not incur death or deadly suffering.

27. "Sunakkhatta, I have given this simile in order to convey a
meaning. This is the meaning here: 'Wound' is a term for the six
internal bases. 'Poisonous humour' is a term for ignorance.
'Arrow' is a term for craving. 'Probe' is a term for mindfulness.
'Knife' is a term for noble wisdom. 'Surgeon' is a term for the
Tathagata, the Accomplished One, the Fully Enlightened One.

28. "When, Sunakkhatta, a bhikkhu practises restraint in the
six bases of contact, and having understood that attachment is
the root of suffering, 1005 is without attachment, liberated by the
destruction of attachment, it is not possible that he would direct
his body or arouse his mind towards any object of attachment.

29. "Suppose, Sunakkhatta, there were a bronze cup of bever-
age possessing a good colour, smell, and taste, but it was mixed
with poison, and a man came who wanted to live, not to die,
who wanted pleasure and recoiled from pain. 1006 What do you
think, Sunakkhatta, would that man drink that cup of beverage.


868 Sunakkhatta Sutta: Sutta 105


ii 261


knowing: 'If I drink this I will incur death or deadly suffering'?"
- "No, venerable sir." [261] - "So too, when a bhikkhu practises
restraint in the six bases of contact, and having understood that
attachment is the root of suffering, is without attachment, liber-
ated by the destruction of attachment, it is not possible that he
would direct his body or arouse his mind towards any object of
attachment.

30. "Suppose, Sunakkhatta, there were a deadly poisonous
snake, and a man came who wanted to live, not to die, who
wanted pleasure and recoiled from pain. What do you think,
Sunakkhatta, would that man give that deadly poisonous snake
his hand or his thumb, knowing: 'If I am bitten by him I will
incur death or deadly suffering'?" - "No, venerable sir." - "So
too, when a bhikkhu practises restraint in the six bases of con-
tact, and having understood that attachment is the root of suf-
fering, is without attachment, liberated by the destruction of
attachment, it is not possible that he would direct his body or
arouse his mind towards any object of attachment."

That is what the Blessed One said. Sunakkhatta, son of the
Licchavis, was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's
words.


106 Anenjasappaya Sutta
The Way to the Imperturbable


1. Thus have I heard . 1007 On one occasion the Blessed One was
living in the Kuru country at a town of the Kurus named
Kammasadhamma. There the Blessed One addressed the
bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir," they replied. The
Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, sensual pleasures 1008 are impermanent, hollow,
false, deceptive; they are illusory, the prattle of fools. Sensual
pleasures here and now and sensual pleasures in lives to come,
[262] sensual perceptions here and now and sensual perceptions
in lives to come - both alike are Mara's realm, Mara's domain,
Mara's bait, Mara's hunting ground. On account of them, these
evil unwholesome mental states such as covetousness, ill will,
and presumption arise, and they constitute an obstruction to a
noble disciple in training here.

(the imperturbable)

3. "Therein, bhikkhus, a noble disciple considers thus: 'Sensual
pleasures here and now and sensual pleasures in lives to
come... constitute an obstruction to a noble disciple in training
here. Suppose I were to abide with a mind abundant and exalt-
ed, having transcended the world and made a firm resolution
with the mind. 1009 When I do so, there will be no more evil
unwholesome mental states such as covetousness, ill will, and
presumption in me, and with the abandoning of them my mind
will be unlimited, immeasurable, and well developed.' When he
practises in this way and frequently abides thus, his mind
acquires confidence in this base. 1010 Once there is full confi-
dence, he either attains to the imperturbable now or else he
decides upon [perfecting] wisdom. On the dissolution of the


869


ii 263


870 Anenjasappaya Sutta: Sutta 106


body, after death, it is possible that this consciousness of his,
leading [to rebirth], may pass on [to rebirth] in the imper-
turbable. 1011 This, bhikkhus, is declared to be the first way
directed to the imperturbable.

4. "Again, bhikkhus, a noble disciple considers thus: 1012 '[There
are] sensual pleasures here and now and sensual pleasures in
lives to come, sensual perceptions here and now and sensual
perceptions in lives to come; whatever material form [there is],
all material form is the four great elements and the material
form derived from the four great elements.' When he practises
in this way and frequently abides thus, his mind acquires confi-
dence in this base. Once there is full confidence, he either attains
to the imperturbable now or else he decides upon [perfecting]
wisdom. On the dissolution of the body, after death, it is possi-
ble that this consciousness of his, leading [to rebirth], may pass
on [to rebirth] in the imperturbable. This, bhikkhus, is declared
to be the second way directed to the imperturbable. [263]

5. "Again, bhikkhus, a noble disciple considers thus: 1013
'Sensual pleasures here and now and sensual pleasures in lives
to come, sensual perceptions here and now and sensual percep-
tions in lives to come, material forms here and now and material
forms in lives to come, perceptions of forms here and now and
perceptions of forms in lives to come - both alike are imperma-
nent. What is impermanent is not worth delighting in, not worth
welcoming, not worth holding to.' When he practises in this
way and frequently abides thus, his mind acquires confidence in
this base. Once there is full confidence, he either attains to the
imperturbable now or else he decides upon [perfecting] wis-
dom. On the dissolution of the body, after death, it is possible
that this consciousness of his, leading [to rebirth], may pass on
[to rebirth] in the imperturbable. This, bhikkhus, is declared to
be the third way directed to the imperturbable.

(the base of nothingness)

6. "Again, bhikkhus, a noble disciple considers thus: 1014 'Sensual
pleasures here and now and sensual pleasures in lives to come,
sensual perceptions here and now and sensual perceptions in
lives to come, material forms here and now and material forms
in lives to come, perceptions of forms here and now and


ii 264


The Way to the Imperturbable 871


perceptions of forms in lives to come, and perceptions of the
imperturbable - all are perceptions. Where these perceptions
cease without remainder, that is the peaceful, that is the sub-
lime, namely, the base of nothingness.' When he practises in this
way and frequently abides thus, his mind acquires confidence in
this base. Once there is full confidence, he either attains to the
base of nothingness now or else he decides upon [perfecting]
wisdom. On the dissolution of the body, after death, it is possi-
ble that this consciousness of his, leading [to rebirth], may pass
on [to rebirth] in the base of nothingness. This, bhikkhus, is
declared to be the first way directed to the base of nothingness.

7. "Again, bhikkhus, a noble disciple, gone to the forest or to
the root of a tree or to an empty hut, considers thus: 'This is void
of a self or of what belongs to a self.' 1015 When he practises in this
way and frequently abides thus, his mind acquires confidence in
this base. Once there is full confidence, he either attains to the
base of nothingness now or else he decides upon [perfecting]
wisdom. On the dissolution of the body, after death, it is possible
that this consciousness of his, leading [to rebirth], may pass on
[to rebirth] in the base of nothingness. This, bhikkhus, is declared
to be the second way directed to the base of nothingness.

8. "Again, bhikkhus, a noble disciple considers thus: 'I am not
anything belonging to anyone anywhere, [264] nor is there any-
thing belonging to me in anyone anywhere.' 1016 When he prac-
tises in this way and frequently abides thus, his mind acquires
confidence in this base. Once there is full confidence, he either
attains to the base of nothingness now or else he decides upon
[perfecting] wisdom. On the dissolution of the body, after death,
it is possible that this consciousness of his, leading [to rebirth],
may pass on [to rebirth] in the base of nothingness. This,
bhikkhus, is declared to be the third way directed to the base of
nothingness.

(the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception)

9. "Again, bhikkhus, a noble disciple considers thus: 'Sensual
pleasures here and now and sensual pleasures in lives to come,
sensual perceptions here and now and sensual perceptions in
lives to come, material forms here and now and material forms
in lives to come, perceptions of forms here and now and


ii 265



872 Anenjasappaya Sutta: Sutta 106


perceptions of forms in lives to come, perceptions of the imper-
turbable, and perceptions of the base of nothingness - all are per-
ceptions. Where these perceptions cease without remainder, that
is the peaceful, that is the sublime, namely, the base of neither-
perception-nor-non-perception.' When he practises in this way
and frequently abides thus, his mind acquires confidence in this
base. Once there is full confidence, he either attains to the base of
neither-perception-nor-non-perception now or else he decides
upon [perfecting] wisdom. On the dissolution of the body, after
death, it is possible that this consciousness of his, leading [to
rebirth], may pass on [to rebirth] in the base of neither-perception-
nor-non-perception. This, bhikkhus, is declared to be the way
directed to the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception."

(nibbana)

10. When this was said, the venerable Ananda said to the
Blessed One: "Venerable sir, here a bhikkhu is practising thus:
'If it were not, it would not be mine; it will not be and it will not
be mine. What exists, what has come to be, that I am abandon-
ing.' 1017 Thus he obtains equanimity. 1018 Venerable sir, does such
a bhikkhu attain Nibbana?"

"One bhikkhu here, Ananda, might attain Nibbana, another
bhikkhu here might not attain Nibbana."

"What is the cause and reason, venerable sir, why one
bhikkhu here might attain Nibbana, while another bhikkhu here
might not attain Nibbana?"

"Here, Ananda, a bhikkhu is practising thus: 'If it were not, it
would not be mine; it will not be and it will not be mine. What
exists, [265] what has come to be, that I am abandoning.' Thus
he obtains equanimity. He delights in that equanimity, wel-
comes it, and remains holding to it. As he does so, his conscious-
ness becomes dependent on it and clings to it. A bhikkhu,
Ananda, who is affected by clinging does not attain Nibbana."

11. "But, venerable sir, when that bhikkhu clings, what does
he cling to?"

"To the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception,
Ananda."

"When that bhikkhu clings, venerable sir, it seems he clings to
the best [object of] clinging."


ii 266


The Way to the Imperturbable 873


"When that bhikkhu clings, Ananda, he clings to the best
[object of] clinging; for this is the best [object of] clinging, name-
ly, the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception. 1019

12. "Here, Ananda, a bhikkhu is practising thus: 'If it were
not, it would not be mine; it will not be and it will not be mine.
What exists, what has come to be, that I am abandoning/ Thus
he obtains equanimity. He does not delight in that equanimity,
welcome it, or remain holding to it. Since he does not do so, his
consciousness does not become dependent on it and does not
cling to it. A bhikkhu, Ananda, who is without clinging attains
Nibbana."

13. "It is wonderful, venerable sir, it is marvellous! The Blessed
One, indeed, has explained to us the crossing of the flood in
dependence upon one support or another. 1020 But, venerable sir,
what is noble liberation?" 1021

"Here, Ananda, a noble disciple considers thus: 'Sensual plea-
sures here and now and sensual pleasures in lives to come, sen-
sual perceptions here and now and sensual perceptions in lives
to come, material forms here and now and material forms in
lives to come, perceptions of forms here and now and percep-
tions of forms in lives to come, perceptions of the imperturbable,
perceptions of the base of nothingness, and perceptions of the
base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception - this is personal-
ity as far as personality extends. 1022 This is the Deathless, name-
ly, the liberation of the mind through not clinging.' 1023

14. "Thus, Ananda, I have taught the way directed to the
imperturbable, I have taught the way directed to the base of
nothingness, I have taught the way directed to the base of nei-
ther-perception-nor-non-perception, I have taught the crossing
of the flood in dependence upon one support or another, I haye
taught noble liberation.

15. "What should be done for his disciples out of compassion
by a teacher who seeks their welfare and has compassion for
them, [266] that I have done for you, Ananda. There are these
roots of trees, these empty huts. Meditate, Ananda, do not delay,
or else you will regret it later. This is our instruction to you."

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Ananda was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.



107 Ganakamoggallana Sutta
To Ganaka Moggallana


[1] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was
living at Savatthl in the Eastern Park, in the Palace of Migara's
Mother. Then the brahmin Ganaka Moggallana went to the
Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him. When this cour-
teous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one side
and said to the Blessed One:

2. "Master Gotama, in this Palace of Migara's Mother there
can be seen gradual training, gradual practice, and gradual
progress, that is, down to the last step of the staircase. 1024
Among these brahmins too, there can be seen gradual training,
gradual practice, and gradual progress, that is, in study. Among
archers too, there can be seen gradual training... that is, in
archery. And also among accountants 1025 like us, who earn our
living by accountancy, there can be seen gradual training... that
is, in computation. For when we get an apprentice first we make
him count: one one, two twos, three threes, four fours, five fives,
six sixes, seven sevens, eight eights, nine nines, ten tens; and we
make him count a hundred too. Now is it also possible. Master
Gotama, to describe gradual training, gradual practice, and
gradual progress in this Dhamma and Discipline?" [2]

3. "It is possible, brahmin, to describe gradual training, grad-
ual practice, and gradual progress in this Dhamma and
Discipline. Just as, brahmin, when a clever horse-trainer
obtains a fine thoroughbred colt, he first makes him get used to
wearing the bit, and afterwards trains him further, 1026 so when
the Tathagata obtains a person to be tamed he first disciplines
him thus: 'Come, bhikkhu, be virtuous, restrained with the
restraint of the Patimokkha, be perfect in conduct and resort,
and seeing fear in the slightest fault, train by undertaking the
training precepts.'


874


To Ganaka MoggaMna 875


iii 3


4. "When, brahmin, the bhikkhu is virtuous... and seeing fear
in the slightest fault, trains by undertaking the training precepts,
then the Tathagata disciplines him further: 'Come, bhikkhu,
guard the doors of your sense faculties. On seeing a form with
the eye, do not grasp at its signs and features. Since, if you were
to leave the eye faculty unguarded, evil unwholesome states of
covetousness and grief might invade you, practise the way of its
restraint, guard the eye faculty, undertake the restraint of the
eye faculty. On hearing a sound with the ear... On smelling an
odour with the nose... On tasting a flavour with the tongue... On
touching a tangible with the body... On cognizing a mind-object
with the mind, do not grasp at its signs and features. Since, if you
were to leave the mind faculty unguarded, evil unwholesome
states might invade you, practise the way of its restraint, guard
the mind faculty, undertake the restraint of the mind faculty.'

5. "When, brahmin, the bhikkhu guards the doors of his sense
faculties, then the Tathagata disciplines him further: 'Come,
bhikkhu, be moderate in eating. Reflecting wisely, you should
take food neither for amusement nor for intoxication nor for the
sake of physical beauty and attractiveness, but only for the
endurance and continuance of this body, for ending discomfort,
and for assisting the holy life, considering: "Thus I shall termi-
nate old feelings without arousing new feelings and I shall be
healthy and blameless and shall live in comfort.'"

6. "When, [3] brahmin, the bhikkhu is moderate in eating,
then the Tathagata disciplines him further: 'Come, bhikkhu, be
devoted to wakefulness. During the day, while walking back
and forth and sitting, purify your mind of obstructive states. In
the first watch of the night, while walking back and forth and
sitting, purify your mind of obstructive states. In the middle
watch of the night you should lie down on the right side in fhe
lion's pose with one foot overlapping the other, mindful and
fully aware, after noting in your mind the time for rising. After
rising, in the third watch of the night, while walking back and
forth and sitting, purify your mind of obstructive states.'

7. "When, brahmin, the bhikkhu is devoted to wakefulness,
then the Tathagata disciplines him further: 'Come, bhikkhu, be
possessed of mindfulness and full awareness. Act in full aware-
ness when going forward and returning; act in full awareness
when looking ahead and looking away; act in full awareness



876 Ganakamoggallana Sutta: Sutta 107 iii 4


when flexing and extending youi limbs; act in full awareness
when wearing your robes and carrying your outer robe and
bowl; act in full awareness when eating, drinking, consuming
food, and tasting; act in full awareness when defecating and uri-
nating; act in full awareness when walking, standing, sitting,
falling asleep, waking up, talking, and keeping silent.'

8. "When, brahmin, the bhikkhu possesses mindfulness and
full awareness, then the Tathagata disciplines him further:
'Come, bhikkhu, resort to a secluded resting place: the forest,
the root of a tree, a mountain, a ravine, a hillside cave, a charnel
ground, a jungle thicket, an open space, a heap of straw.'

9. "He resorts to a secluded resting place: the forest. . .a heap of
straw. On returning from his almsround, after his meal he sits
down, folding his legs crosswise, setting his body erect, and
establishing mindfulness before him. Abandoning covetousness
for the world, he abides with a mind free from covetousness; he
purifies his mind from covetousness. Abandoning ill will and
hatred, he abides with a mind free from ill will, compassionate
for the welfare of all living beings; he purifies his mind from ill
will and hatred. Abandoning sloth and torpor, he abides free
from sloth and torpor, percipient of light, mindful and fully
aware; he purifies his mind from sloth and torpor. Abandoning
restlessness and remorse, he abides unagitated with a mind
inwardly peaceful; he purifies his mind from restlessness and
remorse. Abandoning doubt, he abides having gone beyond
doubt, unperplexed»about wholesome states; he purifies his
mind from doubt. [4]

10. "Having thus abandoned these five hindrances, imperfec-
tions of the mind that weaken wisdom, quite secluded from
sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, he
enters upon and abides in the first jhana, which is accompanied
by applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure
born of seclusion. With the stilling of applied and sustained
thought, he enters upon and abides in the second jhana, which
has self-confidence and singleness of mind without applied and
sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure bom of concentra-
tion. With the fading away as well of rapture, he abides in
equanimity, and mindful and fully aware, still feeling pleasure
with the body, he enters upon and abides in the third jhana, on
account of which noble ones announce: 'He has a pleasant


To Ganaka Moggallana 877


iii 5


abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.' With the abandon-
ing of pleasure and pain, and with the previous disappearance
of joy and grief, he enters upon and abides in the fourth jhana,
which has neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness
due to equanimity.

11. "This is my instruction, brahmin, to those bhikkhus who
are in the higher training, whose minds have not yet attained
the goal, who abide aspiring to the supreme security from
bondage. But these things conduce both to a pleasant abiding
here and now and to mindfulness and full awareness for those
bhikkhus who are arahants with taints destroyed, who have
lived the holy life, done what had to be done, laid down the bur-
den, reached the true goal, destroyed the fetters of being, and
are completely liberated through final knowledge." 1027

12. When this was said, the brahmin Ganaka Moggallana
asked the Blessed One: "When Master Gotama's disciples are
thus advised and instructed by him, do they all attain Nibbana,
the ultimate goal, or do some not attain it?"

"When, brahmin, they are thus advised and instructed by me,
some of my disciples attain Nibbana, the ultimate goal, and
some do not attain it."

13. "Master Gotama, since Nibbana exists and the path lead-
ing to Nibbana exists and Master Gotama is present as the
guide, what is the cause and reason why, when Master
Gotama's disciples are thus advised and instructed by him,
some of them attain Nibbana, the ultimate goal, and some do
not attain it?"

14. "As to that, brahmin, I will ask you a question in return.
Answer it as you choose. [5] What do you think, brahmin? Are
you familiar with the road leading to Rajagaha?"

"Yes, Master Gotama, I am familiar with the road leading ’to
Rajagaha."

"What do you think, brahmin? Suppose a man came who
wanted to go to Rajagaha, and he approached you and said:
'Venerable sir, I want to go to Rajagaha. Show me the road to
Rajagaha.' Then you told him: 'Now, good man, this road goes
to Rajagaha. Follow it for awhile and you will see a certain vil-
lage, go a little further and you will see a certain town, go a little
further and you will see Rajagaha with its lovely parks, groves,
meadows, and ponds.' Then, having been thus advised and


878 Ganakamoggallana Sutta: Sutta 107


iii 6


instructed by you, he would take a wrong road and would go to
the west. Then a second man came who wanted to go to Raja-
gaha, and he approached you and said: 'Venerable sir, I want to
go to Rajagaha.' Then you told him: 'Now, good man, this road
goes to Rajagaha. Follow it for a while... and you will see
Rajagaha with its lovely parks, groves, meadows, and ponds.'
Then, having been thus advised and instructed by you, he
would arrive safely in Rajagaha. Now, brahmin, since Rajagaha
exists and the path leading to Rajagaha exists and you are pre-
sent as the guide, what is the cause and reason why, when those
men have been thus advised and instructed by you, one man
takes a wrong road and goes to the west and one arrives safely
in Rajagaha?" [6]

"What can I do about that. Master Gotama? I am one who
shows the way."

"So too, brahmin, Nibbana exists and the path leading to
Nibbana exists and I am present as the guide. Yet when my dis-
ciples have been thus advised and instructed by me, some of
them attain Nibbana, the ultimate goal, and some do not attain
it. What can I do about that, brahmin? The Tathagata is one who
shows the way." 1028

15. When this was said, the brahmin Ganaka Moggallana said
to the Blessed One: 1029 "There are persons who are faithless and
have gone forth from the home life into homelessness not out of
faith but seeking a livelihood, who are fraudulent, deceitful,
treacherous, haughty, hollow, personally vain, rough-tongued,
loose-spoken, unguarded in their sense faculties, immoderate in
eating, undevoted to wakefulness, unconcerned with recluseship,
not greatly respectful of training, luxurious, careless, leaders in
backsliding, neglectful of seclusion, lazy, wanting in energy,
unmindful, not fully aware, unconcentrated, with straying minds,
devoid of wisdom, drivellers. Master Gotama does not dwell
together with these.

"But there are clansmen who have gone forth out of faith
from the home life into homelessness, who are not fraudulent,
deceitful, treacherous, haughty, hollow, personally vain, rough-
tongued, and loose-spoken; who are guarded in their sense fac-
ulties, moderate in eating, devoted to wakefulness, concerned
with recluseship, greatly respectful of training, not luxurious or
careless, who are keen to avoid backsliding, leaders in seclusion,


iii7


To Ganaka Moggallana 879


energetic, resolute, established in mindfulness, fully aware,
concentrated, with unified minds, possessing wisdom, not driv-
ellers. Master Gotama dwells together with these.

16 "Just as black orris root is reckoned as the best of root per-
fumes and red sandalwood is reckoned as the best of wood
perfumes and jasmine is reckoned as the best of flower per-
fumes, [7] so too, Master Gotama's advice is supreme among the
teachings of today. 1030

17. "Magnificent, Master Gotama! Magnificent, Master
Gotama! Master Gotama has made the Dhamma clear in many
ways, as though he were turning upright what had been over-
turned, revealing what was hidden, showing the way to one
who was lost, or holding up a lamp in the dark for those with
eyesight to see forms. I go to Master Gotama for refuge and to
the Dhamma and to the Sangha of bhikkhus. Let Master Gotama
remember me as a lay follower who has gone to him for refuge
for life."


r


108 Gopakamoggallana Sutta
With Gopaka Moggallana




1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the venerable Ananda
was living at Rajagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels'
Sanctuary, not long after the Blessed One had attained to final
Nibbana. 1031

2. Now on that occasion King Ajatasattu Vedehiputta of
Magadha, being suspicious of King Pajjota, was having Raja-
gaha fortified. 1032

3. Then, when it was morning, the venerable Ananda dressed,
and taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Rajagaha for
alms. Then the venerable Ananda thought: "It is still too early to
wander for alms in Rajagaha. Suppose I went to the brahmin
Gopaka Moggallana at his workplace."

4. So the venerable Ananda went to the brahmin Gopaka
Moggallana at his workplace. The brahmin Gopaka Moggallana
saw the venerable Ananda coming in the distance and said to
him: "Let Master Ananda come! Welcome to Master Ananda! It
is long since Master Ananda found an opportunity to come here.
Let Master Ananda be seated; this seat is ready." The venerable
Ananda sat down on the seat made ready. [8] The brahmin
Gopaka Moggallana took a low seat, sat down at one side, and
asked the venerable Ananda:

5. "Master Ananda, is there any single bhikkhu who possesses
in each and every way all those qualities that were possessed by
Master Gotama, accomplished and fully enlightened?"

"There is no single bhikkhu, brahmin, who possesses in each
and every way all those qualities that were possessed by the
Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened. For the
Blessed One was the arouser of the unarisen path, the producer
of the unproduced path, the declarer of the undeclared path; he
was the knower of the path, the finder of the path, the one



880


With Gopaka Moggallana 881


iii 9


skilled in the path. But his disciples now abide following that
path and become possessed of it afterwards."

6. But this discussion between the venerable Ananda and the
brahmin Gopaka Moggallana was interrupted; for then the
brahmin Vassakara, the minister of Magadha, 1033 while super-
vising the work at Raj a ga ha, went to the venerable Ananda at
the workplace of the brahmin Gopaka Moggallana. He
exchanged greetings with the venerable Ananda, and when this
courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one
side and asked the venerable Ananda: "For what discussion are
you sitting together here now. Master Ananda? And what was
your discussion that was interrupted?"

"Brahmin, the brahmin Gopaka Moggallana asked me:
'Master Ananda, is there any single bhikkhu who possesses in
each and every way all those qualities that were possessed by
Master Gotama, accomplished and fully enlightened?' I replied
to the brahmin Gopaka Moggallana: 'There is no single bhikkhu,
brahmin, who possesses in each and every way all those quali-
ties that were possessed by the Blessed One, accomplished and
fully enlightened. For the Blessed One was the arouser of the
unarisen path [9]... But his disciples now abide following that
path and become possessed of it afterwards.' This was our dis-
cussion that was interrupted when you arrived."

7. "Is there. Master Ananda, any single bhikkhu who was
appointed by Master Gotama thus: 'He will be your refuge
when I am gone,' and whom you now have recourse to?"

"There is no single bhikkhu, brahmin, who was appointed by
the Blessed One who knows and sees, accomplished and fully
enlightened, thus: 'He will be your refuge when I am gone,' and
whom we now have recourse to."

8. "But is there. Master Ananda, any single bhikkhu who has
been chosen by the Sangha and appointed by a number of elder
bhikkhus thus: 'He will be our refuge after the Blessed One has
gone,' and whom you now have recourse to?"

"There is no single bhikkhu, brahmin, who has been chosen
by the Sangha and appointed by a number of elder bhikkhus
thus: 'He will be our refuge after the Blessed One has gone,' and
whom we now have recourse to."

9. "But if you have no refuge. Master Ananda, what is the
cause for your concord?"



882 Gopakamoggallana Sutta: Sutta 108


iiill


"We are not without a refuge, brahmin. We have a refuge; we
have the Dhamma as our refuge."

10. "But when you were asked: 'Is there. Master Ananda, any
single bhikkhu who was appointed by Master Gotama thus: "He
will be your refuge when I am gone," and whom you now have
recourse to?' you answered: 'There is no such single bhikkhu...
whom we now have recourse to.' When you were asked: 'Is
there. Master Ananda, any single bhikkhu who has been chosen
by the Sangha and appointed by a number of elder bhikkhus
thus: "He will be our refuge after the Blessed One has gone,"
and whom you now have recourse to?' you answered: 'There is
no such single bhikkhu. ..[10]. ..whom we now have recourse
to.' When you were asked: 'But if you have no refuge. Master
Ananda, what is the cause for your concord?' you answered:
'We are not without a refuge, brahmin. We have a refuge; we
have the Dhamma as our refuge.' Now how should the meaning
of these statements be regarded. Master Ananda?"

"Brahmin, the Blessed One who knows and sees, accom-
plished and fully enlightened, has prescribed the course of train-
ing for bhikkhus and he has laid down the Patimokkha. On the
Uposatha day as many of us as live in dependence upon a single
village district meet together in unison, and when we meet we
ask one who knows the Patimokkha to recite it. If a bhikkhu
remembers an offence or a transgression while the Patimokkha
is being recited, we deal with him according to the Dhamma in
the way we have been instructed. It is not the worthy ones who
deal with us; it is the Dhamma that deals with us." 1034

11. "Is there. Master Ananda, any single bhikkhu whom you
now honour, respect, revere, and venerate, and on whom you
live in dependence honouring and respecting him?"

"There is a single bhikkhu, brahmin, whom we now honour,
respect, revere, and venerate, and on whom we live in depen-
dence honouring and respecting him."

12. "But when you were asked: 'Is there. Master Ananda, any
single bhikkhu who was appointed by Master Gotama...?' you
answered 'There is no such single bhikkhu...' When you were
asked: 'Is there. Master Ananda, any single bhikkhu who has
been chosen by the Sangha...?' [11] you answered: 'There is no
such single bhikkhu...' When you were asked: 'Is there. Master
Ananda, any single bhikkhu whom you honour, respect, revere.


in 12


With Gopaka Moggallana 883


and venerate, and on whom you live in dependence honouring
and respecting him?' you answered: 'There is such a single
bhikkhu whom we now honour... and on whom we live in
dependence honouring and respecting him.' Now how should
the meaning of these statements be regarded. Master Ananda?"

13. "There are, brahmin, ten qualities inspiring confidence that
have been declared by the Blessed One who knows and sees,
accomplished and fully enlightened. When these qualities are
found in anyone among us, we honour, respect, revere, and ven-
erate him, and live in dependence on him honouring and
respecting him. What are the ten?

14. (1) "Here, brahmin, a bhikkhu is virtuous, he dwells
restrained with the restraint of the Patimokkha, he is perfect in
conduct and resort, and seeing fear in the slightest faults, he
trains himself by undertaking the training precepts.

15. (2) "He has learned much, remembers what he has learned,
and consolidates what he has learned. Such teachings as are
good in the beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end,
with the right meaning and phrasing, and which affirm a holy
life that is utterly perfect and pure - such teachings as these he
has learned much of, remembered, mastered verbally, investi-
gated with the mind, and penetrated well by view.

16. (3) "He is content with his robes, almsfood, resting place,
and medicinal requisites.

17. (4) "He obtains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the
four jhanas that constitute the higher mind and provide a pleas-
ant abiding here and now.

18. (5) "He wields the various kinds of supernormal power:
having been one, he becomes many; having been many, he
becomes one; he appears and vanishes; he goes unhindered
through a wall, through an enclosure, through a mountain as
though through space; he dives in and out of the earth as
though it were water; he walks on water without sinking as
though it were earth; [12] seated cross-legged, he travels in
space like a bird; with his hand he touches and strokes the moon
and sun so powerful and mighty; he wields bodily mastery even
as far as the Brahma-world.

19. (6) "With the divine ear element, which is purified and
surpasses the human, he hears both kinds of sounds, the divine
and the human, those that are far as well as near.


884 Gopakamoggallana Sutta: Sutta 108


iii 13


20. (7) "He understands the minds of other beings, of other
persons, having encompassed them with his own mind. He
understands a mind affected by lust as affected by lust and a
mind unaffected by lust as unaffected by lust; he understands a
mind affected by hate as affected by hate and a mind unaffected
by hate as unaffected by hate; he understands a mind affected
by delusion as affected by delusion and a mind unaffected by
delusion as unaffected by delusion; he understands a contracted
mind as contracted and a distracted mind as distracted; he
understands an exalted mind as exalted and an unexalted mind
as unexalted; he understands a surpassed mind as surpassed
and an unsurpassed mind as unsurpassed; he understands a
concentrated mind as concentrated and an unconcentrated mind
as unconcentrated; he understands a liberated mind as liberated
and an unliberated mind as unliberated.

21. (8) "He recollects his manifold past lives, that is, one birth,
two births ... (as Sutta 51, §24)... Thus with their aspects and par-
ticulars he recollects his manifold past lives.

22. (9) "With the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses
the human, he sees beings passing away and reappearing, inferi-
or and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and
he understands how beings pass on according to their actions.

23. (10) "By realising for himself with direct knowledge, he
here and now enters upon and abides in the deliverance of mind
and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruc-
tion of the taints.

"These, brahmin, are the ten qualities inspiring confidence
that have been declared by the Blessed One who knows and
sees, accomplished and fully enlightened. When these qualities
are found in anyone among us, we honour, respect, revere, and
venerate him, and live in dependence on him honouring and
respecting him." [13]

24. When this was said, the brahmin Vassakara, the minister
of Magadha, said to General Upananda: "What do you think,
general? When these worthy ones honour one who should be
honoured, respect one who should be respected, revere one who
should be revered, and venerate one who should be venerated,
surely they honour one who should be honoured. . .and venerate
one who should be venerated. For if these worthy ones did not
honour, respect, revere, and venerate such a person, then whom


iii 14


With Gopaka Moggallana 885


could they honour, respect, revere, and venerate, and on whom
could they live in dependence honouring and respecting?"

25. Then the brahmin Vassakara, the minister of Magadha, said
to the venerable Ananda: "Where is Master Ananda living now?"

"Now I am living in the Bamboo Grove, brahmin."

"I hope. Master Ananda, that the Bamboo Grove is pleasant,
quiet and undisturbed by voices, with an atmosphere of seclu-
sion, remote from people, favourable for retreat."

"Indeed, brahmin, that the Bamboo Grove is pleasant...
favourable for retreat is because of such guardian protectors as
yourself."

"Indeed, Master Ananda, that the Bamboo Grove is pleas-
ant... favourable for retreat is because of the worthy ones who
are meditators and cultivate meditation. The worthy ones are
meditators and cultivate meditation. On one occasion. Master
Ananda, Master Gotama was living at Vesall in the Hall with
the Peaked Roof in the Great Wood. Then I went there and
approached Master Gotama, and in many ways he gave a talk
about meditation. Master Gotama was a meditator and culti-
vated meditation, and he praised every type of meditation."

26. "The Blessed One, brahmin, did not praise every type of
meditation, nor did he condemn every type of meditation. What
kind [14] of meditation did the Blessed One not praise? Here,
brahmin, someone abides with his mind obsessed by sensual
lust, a prey to sensual lust, and he does not understand as it
actually is the escape from arisen sensual lust. While he harbours
sensual lust within, he meditates, premeditates, out-meditates,
and mismeditates. 1035 He abides with his mind obsessed by ill
will, a prey to ill will... with his mind obsessed by sloth and tor-
por, a prey to sloth and torpor... with his mind obsessed by rest-
lessness and remorse, a prey to restlessness and remorse... with
his mind obsessed by doubt, a prey to doubt, and he does not
understand as it actually is the escape from arisen doubt. While
he harbours doubt within, he meditates, premeditates, out-med-
itates, and mismeditates. The Blessed One did not praise that
kind of meditation.

27. "And what kind of meditation did the Blessed One praise?
Here, brahmin, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in
the first jhana...With the stilling of applied and sustained


886 Gopakamoggallana Sutta: Sutta 108


iii 15


thought, he enters upon and abides in the second jhana...With
the fading away as well of rapture... he enters upon and abides
in the third jhana.,.With the abandoning of pleasure and
pain... he enters upon and abides in the fourth jhana...The
Blessed One praised that kind of meditation."

28. "It seems. Master Ananda, that Master Gotama censured
that kind of meditation that should be censured and praised that
kind of meditation that should be praised. And now. Master
Ananda, we depart. We are busy and have much to do."

"Now is the time, brahmin, to do as you think fit." [15]

Then the brahmin Vassakara, the minister of Magadha, having
delighted and rejoiced in the venerable Ananda's words, rose
from his seat and departed.

29. Then, soon after he had left, the brahmin Gopaka
Moggallana said to the venerable Ananda: "Master Ananda has
not yet answered what we asked him."

"Did we not tell you, brahmin: There is no single bhikkhu,
brahmin, who possesses in each and every way all those qualities
that were possessed by the Blessed One, accomplished and fully
enlightened. For the Blessed One was the arouser of the unarisen
path, the producer of the unproduced path, the declarer of the
undeclared path; he was the knower of the path, the finder of
the path, the one skilled in the path. But his disciples now abide
following that path and become possessed of it afterwards'?"


109 Mahapunnama Sutta
The Greater Discourse on the
Full-moon Night


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was living
at SavatthT in the Eastern Park, in the Palace of Migara's Mother.

2. On that occasion - on the Uposatha day of the fifteenth, 1036
on the full-moon night - the Blessed One was seated in the open
surrounded by the Sangha of bhikkhus.

3. Then a certain bhikkhu rose from his seat, 1037 arranged his
upper robe on one shoulder, and extending his hands in rever-
ential salutation towards the Blessed One, said to him:
"Venerable sir, I would ask the Blessed One about a certain
point, if the Blessed One would grant me an answer to my ques-
tion." - "Sit on your own seat, bhikkhu, and ask what you like."
So the bhikkhu sat on his own seat and said to the Blessed One:

4. "Are these not, venerable sir, the five aggregates affected by
clinging; [16] that is, the material form aggregate affected by
clinging, the feeling aggregate affected by clinging, the percep-
tion aggregate affected by clinging, the formations aggregate
affected by clinging, and the consciousness aggregate affected
by clinging?"

"These, bhikkhus, are the five aggregates affected by clinging;
that is, the material form aggregate affected by clinging... and
the consciousness aggregate affected by clinging."

Saying, "Good, venerable sir," the bhikkhu delighted and
rejoiced in the Blessed One's words. Then he asked him a fur-
ther question:

5. "But, venerable sir, in what are these five aggregates affect-
ed by clinging rooted?"

"These five aggregates affected by clinging are rooted in
desire, 1038 bhikkhu."

6. "Venerable sir, is that clinging the same as these five aggre-
gates affected by clinging, or is the clinging something apart


887


iii 17


888 Mahapunnama Sutta: Sutta 109


from the five aggregates affected by clinging?" 1039

"Bhikkhu, that clinging is neither the same as these five aggre-
gates affected by clinging, nor is the clinging something apart
from the five aggregates affected by clinging. It is the desire and
lust in regard to the five aggregates affected by clinging that is
the clinging there."

7. "But, venerable sir, can there be diversity in the desire and
lust regarding these five aggregates affected by clinging?"

"There can be, bhikkhu," the Blessed One said. "Here,
bhikkhu, someone thinks thus: 'May my material form be thus
in the future; may my feeling be thus in the future; may my per-
ception be thus in the future; may my formations be thus in the
future; may my consciousness be thus in the future.' Thus there
is diversity in the desire and lust regarding these five aggregates
affected by clinging."

8. "But, venerable sir, in what way does the term 'aggregates'
apply to the aggregates?"

"Bhikkhu, any kind of material form whatever, whether past,
future, or present, internal or external, gross or subtle, inferior
or superior, far or near - this is the material form aggregate. [17]
Any kind of feeling whatever... far or near - this is the feeling
aggregate. Any kind of perception whatever... far or near - this
is the perception aggregate. Any kind of formations whatever...
far or near - this is the formations aggregate. Any kind of con-
sciousness whatever... far or near - this is the consciousness
aggregate. It is in this way, bhikkhu, that the term 'aggregate'
applies to the aggregates."

9. "What is the cause and condition, venerable sir, for the
manifestation of the material form aggregate? What is the cause
and condition for the manifestation of the feeling aggregate...
the perception aggregate... the formations aggregate... the con-
sciousness aggregate?"

"The four great elements, bhikkhu, are the cause and condi-
tion for the manifestation of the material form aggregate.
Contact is the cause and condition for the manifestation of the
feeling aggregate. Contact is the cause and the condition for the
manifestation of the perception aggregate. Contact is the cause
and condition for the manifestation of the formations aggregate.
Mentality-materiality is the cause and condition for the manifes-


iii 18


The Greater Discourse on the Full-moon Night 889


tation of the consciousness aggregate." 1040

10. "Venerable sir, how does personality view come to be?" 1041

"Here, bhikkhu, an untaught ordinary person, who has no

regard for noble ones and is unskilled and undisciplined in their
Dhamma, who has no regard for true men and is unskilled and
undisciplined in their Dhamma, regards material form as self, or
self as possessed of material form, or material form as in self, or
self as in material form. He regards feeling as self... perception
as self... formations as self... consciousness as self, or self as pos-
sessed of consciousness, [18] or consciousness as in self, or self
as in consciousness. That is how personality view comes to be."

11. "But, venerable sir, how does personality view not come
to be?"

"Here, bhikkhu, a well-taught noble disciple, who has regard
for noble ones and is skilled and disciplined in their Dhamma,
who has regard for true men and is skilled and disciplined in
their Dhamma, does not regard material form as self, or self as
possessed of material form, or material form as in self, or self
as in material form. He does not regard feeling as self... percep-
tion as self... formations as self... consciousness as self, or self
as possessed of consciousness, or consciousness as in self, or
self as in consciousness. That is how personality view does not
come to be."

12. "What, venerable sir, is the gratification, what is the dan-
ger, and what is the escape in the case of material form? What is
the gratification, what is the danger, and what is the escape in
the case of feeling... in the case of perception... in the case of for-
mations. . .in the case of consciousness?"

"The pleasure and joy, bhikkhu, that arise in dependence on
material form - this is the gratification in the case of material
form. Material form is impermanent, suffering, and subject to
change - this is the danger in the case of material form. The
removal of desire and lust, the abandonment of desire and lust
for material form - this is the escape in the case of material form.

"The pleasure and joy that arise in dependence on feeling... in
dependence on perception... in dependence on formations... in
dependence on consciousness - this is the gratification in the
case of consciousness. Consciousness is impermanent, suffer-
ing, and subject to change - this is the danger in the case of


890 Mahapunnama Sutta: Sutta 109


iii 20


consciousness. The removal of. desire and lust, the abandonment
of desire and lust for consciousness - this is the escape in the
case of consciousness."

13. "Venerable sir, how does one know, how does one see, so
that in regard to this body with its consciousness and all exter-
nal signs, there is no I-making, mine-making, and underlying
tendency to conceit?"

"Bhikkhu, any kind of material form whatever, whether past
or present, internal or external, gross or subtle, inferior [19] or
superior, far or near - one sees all material form as it actually is
with proper wisdom thus: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is
not my self.' Any kind of feeling whatever. . .Any kind of percep-
tion whatever... Any kind of formations whatever... Any kind of
consciousness whatever. . .one sees all consciousness as it actually
is with proper wisdom thus: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this
is not my self.' It is when one knows and sees thus that in regard
to this body with its consciousness and all external signs there is
no I-making, mine-making, or underlying tendency to conceit."

14. Then, in the mind of a certain bhikkhu this thought arose:
"So, it seems, material form is not self, feeling is not self, percep-
tion is not self, formations are not self, consciousness is not self.
What self, then, will actions done by the not-self affect?" 1042

Then the Blessed One, knowing in his mind the thought in
the mind of that bhikkhu, addressed the bhikkhus thus: "It is
possible, bhikkhus, that some misguided man here, obtuse and
ignorant, with his mind dominated by craving," might think that
he can outstrip the Teacher's Dispensation thus: 'So, it seems,
material form is not self... consciousness is not self. What self,
then, will actions done by the not-self affect?' Now, bhikkhus,
you have been trained by me through interrogation on various
occasions in regard to various things. 1043

15. "Bhikkhus, what do you think? Is material form perma-
nent or impermanent?" - "Impermanent, venerable sir." - "Is
what is impermanent suffering or happiness?" - "Suffering,
venerable sir." - "Is what is impermanent, suffering, and subject
to change fit to be regarded thus: 'This is mine, this I am, this is
my self'?" - "No, venerable sir."

"Bhikkhus, what do you think: Is feeling. . .perception. . .forma-
tions... consciousness permanent or impermanent?" - "Imper-
manent, venerable sir." - [20] "Is what is impermanent suffering



iii 20


The Greater Discourse on the Full-moon Night 891


or happiness?" - "Suffering, venerable sir." - "Is what is imper-
manent, suffering, and subject to change fit to be regarded thus:
'This is mine, this I am, this is my self'?" - "No, venerable sir."

16. "Therefore, bhikkhus, any kind of material form whatever,
whether past, future, or present... all material form should be
seen as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: 'This is not mine,
this I am not, this is not my self.' Any kind of feeling whatever. . .
Any kind of perception whatever... Any kind of formations
whatever... Any kind of consciousness whatever... all conscious-
ness should be seen as it actually is with proper wisdom thus:
'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.'

17. "Seeing thus, a well-taught noble disciple becomes
disenchanted with material form, disenchanted with feeling, dis-
enchanted with perception, disenchanted with formations, disen-
chanted with consciousness.

18. "Being disenchanted, he becomes dispassionate. Through
dispassion [his mind] is liberated. When it is liberated there
comes the knowledge: 'It is liberated.' He understands: 'Birth is
destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has
been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.'"

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words. Now while this dis-
course was being spoken, through not clinging the minds of
sixty bhikkhus were liberated from the taints. 1044


110 Culapunnama Sutta
The Shorter Discourse on the
Full-moon Night


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was living
at Savatthi in the Eastern Park, in the Palace of Migara's Mother.

2. On that occasion - the Uposatha day of the fifteenth, on the
full-moon night - [21] the Blessed One was seated in the open
surrounded by the Sangha of bhikkhus. Then, surveying the
silent Sangha of bhikkhus, he addressed them thus:

3. "Bhikkhus, would an untrue man 1045 know of an untrue
man: 'This person is an untrue man'?" - "No, venerable sir." -
"Good, bhikkhus. It is impossible, it cannot be, that an untrue
man should know of an untrue man: "This person is an untrue
man.' But would an untrue man know of a true man: 'This per-
son is a true man'?" - "No, venerable sir." - "Good, bhikkhus. It
is impossible, it cannot be, that an untrue man should know of a
true man: 'This person is a true man.'

4. "Bhikkhus, an untrue man is possessed of bad qualities; he
associates as an untrue ipan, he wills as an untrue man, he coun-
sels as an untrue man, he speaks as an untrue man, he acts as an
untrue man, he holds views as an untrue man, and he gives gifts
as an untrue man.

5. "And how is an untrue man possessed of bad qualities?
Here an untrue man has no faith, no shame, no fear of wrong-
doing; he is unlearned, lazy, forgetful, and unwise. That is how
an untrue man is possessed of bad qualities.

6. "And how does an untrue man associate as an untrue man?
Here an untrue man has for friends and companions those
recluses and brahmins who have no faith, no shame, no fear of
wrongdoing; who are unlearned, lazy, forgetful, and unwise.
That is how an untrue man associates as an untrue man.

7. "And how does an untrue man will as an untrue man? Here


892


iii 23


The Shorter Discourse on the Full-moon Night 893


an untrue man wills for his own affliction, for the affliction of
others, and for the affliction of both. That is how an untrue man
wills as an untrue man.

8. "And how does an untrue man counsel as an untrue man?
Here an untrue man counsels for his own affliction, for the
affliction of others, and for the affliction of both. [22] That is
how an untrue man counsels as an untrue man.

9. "And how does an untrue man speak as an untrue man?
Here an untrue man speaks false speech, malicious speech,
harsh speech, and gossip. That is how an untrue man speaks as
an untrue man.

10. "And how does an untrue man act as an untrue man? Here
an untrue man kills living beings, takes what is not given, and
misconducts himself in sensual pleasures. That is how an untrue
man acts as an untrue man.

11. "And how does an untrue man hold views as an untrue
man? Here an untrue man holds such a view as this: 'There is
nothing given, nothing offered, nothing sacrificed; no fruit or
result of good and bad actions; no this world, no other world; no
mother, no father; no beings who are reborn spontaneously; no
good and virtuous recluses and brahmins in the world who
have realised for themselves by direct knowledge and declare
this world and the other world.' That is how an untrue man
holds views as an untrue man.

12. "And how does an untrue man give gifts as an untrue
man? Here an untrue man gives a gift carelessly, gives it not
with his own hand, gives it without showing respect, gives what
is to be discarded, gives it with the view that nothing will come
of it. That is how an untrue man gives gifts as an untrue man.

13. "That untrue man - thus possessed of bad qualities, who
thus associates as an untrue man, wills as an untrue man, coun-
sels as an untrue man, speaks as an untrue man, acts as an
untrue man, holds views as an untrue man, and gives gifts as an
untrue man - on the dissolution of the body, after death, reap-
pears in the destination of untrue men. And what is the destina-
tion of untrue men? It is hell or the animal world.

14. "Bhikkhus, would a true man know of a true man: 'This
person is a true man'?" [23] - "Yes, venerable sir." - "Good,
bhikkhus. It is possible that a true man would know of a true


894 Culapunnama Sutta: Sutta 110


iii 24


man: 'This person is a true man.' But would a true man know of
an untrue man: 'This person is an untrue man'?" - "Yes, venera-
ble sir." - "Good, bhikkhus. It is possible that a true man would
know of an imbue man: 'This person is an untrue man.'

15. "Bhikkhus, a true man is possessed of good qualities; he
associates as a bue man, he wills as a true man, he counsels as a
true man, he speaks as a true man, he acts as a true man, he
holds views as a bue man, and he gives gifts as a true man.

16. "And how is a true man possessed of good qualities? Here
a true man has faith, shame, and fear of wrongdoing; he is
learned, energetic, mindful, and wise. That is how a true man is
possessed of good qualities.

17. "And how does a true man associate as a bue man? Here a
true man has for his friends and companions those recluses and
brahmins who have faith, shame, and fear of wrongdoing; who
are learned, energetic, mindful, and wise. That is how a true
man associates as a true man.

18. "And how does a true man will as a true man? Here a true
man does not will for his own affliction, for the affliction of
others, or for the affliction of both. That is how a true man wills
as a true man.

19. "And how does a bue man counsel as a bue man? Here a
true man does not counsel for his own affliction, for the afflic-
tion of others, or for the affliction of both. That is how a bue
man counsels as a true man.

20. "And how does a true man speak as a true man? Here a
true man abstains from false speech, from malicious speech,
from harsh speech, and from gossip. That is how a true man
speaks as a bue man.

21. "And how does a bue man act as a true man? Here a true
man abstains from killing living beings, from taking what is not
given, [24] and from misconduct in sensual pleasures. That is
how a true man acts as a bue man.

22. "And how does a bue man hold views as a bue man? Here
a bue man holds such a view as this: 'There is what is given and
what is offered and what is sacrificed; there is fruit and result of
good and bad actions; there is this world and the other world;
there is mother and father; there are beings who are reborn
spontaneously; there are good and virtuous recluses and brah-
mins in the world who have realised for themselves by direct


iii 24


The Shorter Discourse on the Full-moon Night 895


knowledge and declare this world and the other world.' That is
how a true man holds views as a true man.

23. "And how does a true man give gifts as a true man? Here a
true man gives a gift carefully, gives it with his own hand, gives
it showing respect, gives a valuable gift, gives it with the view
that something will come of it. That is how a true man gives
gifts as a true man.

24. "That true man - thus possessed of good qualities, who
thus associates as a true man, wills as a true man, counsels as a
true man, speaks as a true man, acts as a true man, holds views
as a true man, and gives gifts as a true man - on the dissolution
of the body, after death, reappears in the destination of true
men. And what is the destination of true men? It is greatness
among the gods or greatness among human beings."

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.



2

The Division of One by One

(Anupadavagga)



Ill Anupada Sutta
One by One As They Occurred


[25] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was
living at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There
he addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable, sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, Sariputta is wise; Sariputta has great wisdom;
Sariputta has wide wisdom; Sariputta has joyous wisdom;
Sariputta has quick wisdom; Sariputta has keen wisdom;
Sariputta has penetrative wisdom. During half a month,
bhikkhus, Sariputta had insight into states one by one as they
occurred. 1046 Now Sariputta's insight into states one by one as
they occurred was this:

3. "Here, bhikkhus, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unwholesome states, Sariputta entered upon and
abided in the first jhana, which is accompanied by applied and
sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion.

4. "And the states in the first jhana - the applied thought, the
sustained thought, the rapture, the pleasure, and the unification
of mind; the contact, feeling, perception, volition, and mind; the
zeal, decision, energy, mindfulness, equanimity, and attention -
these states were defined by him one by one as they
occurred; 1047 known to him those states arose, known they were
present, known they disappeared. He understood thus: 'So
indeed, these states, not having been, come into being; having
been, they vanish.' Regarding those states, he abided unattract-
ed, unrepelled, independent, detached, free, dissociated, with a
mind rid of barriers. 1048 He understood: 'There is an escape
beyond,' and with the cultivation of that [attainment], he con-
firmed that there is. 1049

5. "Again, bhikkhus, with the stilling of applied and sustained
thought, Sariputta entered and abided in [26] the second jhana.


899


900 Anupada Sutta: Sutta 111


iii 27


which has self-confidence and singleness of mind without
applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure bom
of concentration.

6. "And the states in the second jhana - the self-confidence,
the rapture, the pleasure, and the unification of mind; the con-
tact, feeling, perception, volition, and mind; the zeal, decision,
energy, mindfulness, equanimity, and attention - these states
were defined by him one by one as they occurred; known to him
those states arose, known they were present, known they disap-
peared. He understood thus:... and with the cultivation of that
[attainment], he confirmed that there is.

7. "Again, bhikkhus, with the fading away as well of rapture,
Sariputta abided in equanimity, and mindful and fully aware,
still feeling pleasure with the body, he entered upon and abided
in the third jhana, on account of which noble ones announce:
'He has a pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.'

8. "And the states in the third jhana - the equanimity, the
pleasure, the mindfulness, the full awareness, and the unification
of mind; the contact, feeling, perception, volition, and mind; the
zeal, decision, energy, mindfulness, equanimity, and attention -
these states were defined by him one by one as they occurred;
known to him those states arose, known they were present,
known they disappeared. He understood thus:... and with the
cultivation of that [attainment], he confirmed that there is.

9. "Again, bhikkhus, with the abandoning of pleasure and
pain, and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief,
Sariputta entered upon and abided in the fourth jhana, which
has neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to
equanimity.

10. "And the states in the fourth jhana - the equanimity, the
neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, the mental unconcern due
to tranquillity, 1050 the purity of mindfulness, and the unification
of mind; the contact, feeling, perception, volition, and mind; the
zeal, decision, energy, mindfulness, equanimity, and attention -
these states were defined by him one by one as they occurred;
known to him those states arose, known they were present, [27]
known they disappeared. He understood thus:... and with the
cultivation of that [attainment], he confirmed that there is.

11. "Again, bhikkhus, with the complete surmounting of
perceptions of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of


iii 28


One by One As They Occurred 901


sensory impact, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity,
aware that 'space is infinite/ Sariputta entered upon and abided
in the base of infinite space.

12. "And the states in the base of infinite space - the percep-
tion of the base of infinite space and the unification of mind; the
contact, feeling, perception, volition, and mind; the zeal, deci-
sion, energy, mindfulness, equanimity, and attention - these
states were defined by him one by one as they occurred; known
to him those states arose, known they were present, known they
disappeared. He understood thus:... and with the cultivation of
that [attainment], he confirmed that there is.

13. "Again, bhikkhus, by completely surmounting the base of
infinite space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite/ Sariputta
entered upon and abided in the base of infinite consciousness.

14. "And the states in the base of infinite consciousness - the
perception of the base of infinite consciousness and the unifica-
tion of mind; the contact, feeling, perception, volition, and mind;
the zeal, decision, energy, mindfulness, equanimity, and attention
- these states were defined by him one by one as they occurred;
known to him those states arose, known they were present,
known they disappeared. He understood thus:. . .and with the cul-
tivation of that [attainment], he confirmed that there is. [28]

15. "Again, bhikkhus, by completely surmounting the base of
infinite consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing,' Sariputta
entered upon and abided in the base of nothingness.

16. "And the states in the base of nothingness - the perception
of the base of nothingness and the unification of mind; the con-
tact, feeling, perception, volition, and mind; the zeal, decision,
energy, mindfulness, equanimity, and attention - these states
were defined by him one by one as they occurred; known to
him those states arose, known they were present, known they
disappeared. He understood thus:... and with the cultivation of
that [attainment], he confirmed that there is.

17. "Again, bhikkhus, by completely surmounting the base of
nothingness, Sariputta entered upon and abided in the base of
neither-perception-nor-non-perception.

18. "He emerged mindful from that attainment. Having done
so, he contemplated the past states, which had ceased and
changed, thus: 'So indeed, these states, not having been, come
into being; having been, they vanish.' 1051 Regarding those states.


902 Anupada Sutta: Sutta 111


iii 29


he abided unattracted, unrepelled, independent, detached, free,
dissociated, with a mind rid of barriers. He understood: "There
is an escape beyond,' and with the cultivation of that [attain-
ment], he confirmed that there is.

19. "Again, bhikkhus, by completely surmounting the base of
neither-perception-nor-non-perception, Sariputta entered upon
and abided in the cessation of perception and feeling. And his
taints were destroyed by his seeing with wisdom. 1052

20. "He emerged mindful from that attainment. Having done
so, he recalled the past states, which had ceased and changed,
thus: 'So indeed, these states, not having been, come into being;
having been, they vanish.' 1053 Regarding those states, he abided
unattracted, unrepelled, independent, detached, free, dissociated,
with a mind rid of barriers. He understood: 'There is no escape
beyond,' and with the cultivation of that [attainment], he con-
firmed that there is not. 1054

21. "Bhikkhus, rightly speaking, were it to be said of anyone:
'He has attained mastery and perfection 1055 in noble virtue, [29]
attained mastery and perfection in noble concentration, attained
mastery and perfection in noble wisdom, attained mastery and
perfection in noble deliverance,' it is of Sariputta indeed that
rightly speaking this should be said.

22. "Bhikkhus, rightly speaking, were it to be said of anyone:
'He is the son of the Blessed One, bom of his breast, born of his
mouth, born of the Dhamma, created by the Dhamma, an heir in
the Dhamma, not an heir in material things/ it is of Sariputta
indeed that rightly speaking this should be said.

23. "Bhikkhus, the matchless Wheel of the Dhamma set rolling
by the Tathagata is kept rolling rightly by Sariputta."

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


112 Chabbisodhana Sutta
The Sixfold Purity


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There he
addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu makes a declaration of final
knowledge thus: 'I understand: Birth is destroyed, the holy life
has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no
more coming to any state of being.'

3. "That bhikkhu's words should neither be approved nor dis-
approved. Without approving or disapproving, a question
should be put thus: 'Friend, there are four kinds of expression
rightly proclaimed by the Blessed One who knows and sees,
accomplished and fully enlightened. What four? Telling the seen
as it is seen; telling the heard as it is heard; telling the sensed as
it is sensed; telling the cognized as it is cognized. 1056 [30] These,
friend, are the four kinds of expression rightly proclaimed by
the Blessed One who knows and sees, accomplished and fully
enlightened. How does the venerable one know, how does he
see, regarding these four kinds of expression, so that through
not clinging his mind is liberated from the taints?'

4. "Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu is one with taints destroyed,
who has lived the holy life, done what had to be done, laid
down the burden, reached the true goal, destroyed the fetters of
being, and is completely liberated through final knowledge, this
is the nature of his answer:

"'Friends, regarding the seen I abide unattracted, unrepelled,
independent, detached, free, dissociated, with a mind rid of bar-
riers. 1057 Regarding the heard... Regarding the sensed... Regard-
ing the cognized I abide unattracted, unrepelled, independent,
detached, free, dissociated, with a mind rid of barriers. It is by


903


904 Chabbisodhana Sutta: Sutta 112


iii 31


knowing thus, seeing thus, regarding these four kinds of expres-
sion, that through not clinging my mind is liberated from the
taints.'

5. "Saying 'good/ one may delight and rejoice in that bhikkhu's
words. Having done so, a further question may be put thus:

"'Friend, there are these five aggregates affected by clinging,
rightly proclaimed by the Blessed One who knows and sees,
accomplished and fully enlightened. What five? They are the
material form aggregate affected by clinging, the feeling aggre-
gate affected by clinging, the perception aggregate affected by
clinging, the formations aggregate affected by clinging, and the
consciousness aggregate affected by clinging. These, friend, are
the five aggregates affected by clinging, rightly proclaimed by
the Blessed One who knows and sees, accomplished and fully
enlightened. How does the venerable one know, how does he
see, regarding these five aggregates affected by clinging, so that
through not clinging his mind is liberated from the taints?'

6. "Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu is one with taints destroyed...
and is completely liberated through final knowledge, this is the
nature of his answer:

'"Friends, having known material form to be feeble, fading
away, and comfortless, [31] with the destruction, fading away,
cessation, giving up, and relinquishing of attraction and clinging
regarding material form, of mental standpoints, adherences, and
underlying tendencies regarding material form, 1058 I have
understood that my mind is liberated.

"'Friends, having known feeling... Having known percep-
tion... Having known formations... Having known conscious-
ness to be feeble, fading away, and comfortless, with the
destruction, fading away, cessation, giving up, and relinquish-
ing of attraction and clinging regarding consciousness, of mental
standpoints, adherences, and underlying tendencies regarding
consciousness, I have understood that my mind is liberated.

"'It is by knowing thus, seeing thus, regarding these five
aggregates affected by clinging, that through not clinging my
mind is liberated from the taints.'

7. "Saying 'good,' one may delight and rejoice in that
bhikkhu's words. Having done so, a further question may be
put thus:


iii 32


The Sixfold Purity 905


"'Friend, there are these six elements rightly proclaimed by
the Blessed One who knows and sees, accomplished and fully
enlightened. What six? They are the earth element, the water
element, the fire element, the air element, the space element, and
the consciousness element. These, friend, are the six elements
rightly proclaimed by the Blessed One who knows and sees,
accomplished and fully enlightened. How does the venerable
one know, how does he see, regarding these six elements, so
that through not clinging his mind is liberated from the taints?'

8. "Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu is one with taints destroyed...
and is completely liberated through final knowledge, this is the
nature of his answer:

"'Friends, I have treated the earth element as not self, with no
self based on the earth element. 1059 And with the destruction,
fading away, cessation, giving up, and relinquishing of attrac-
tion and clinging based on the earth element, of mental stand-
points, adherences, and underlying tendencies based on the
earth element, I have understood that my mind is liberated.

"'Friends, I have treated the water element... the fire ele-
ment... the air element... the space element... the consciousness
element as not self, with no self based on the consciousness ele-
ment. And with the destruction, fading away, cessation, giving
up, and relinquishing of attraction and clinging based on the
consciousness element, of mental standpoints, adherences, and
underlying tendencies based on the consciousness element, I
have understood that my mind is liberated.

"'It is by knowing thus, seeing thus, regarding these six ele-
ments, that through not clinging my mind is liberated from
the taints.'

9. "Saying 'good,' [32] one may delight and rejoice in that
bhikkhu's words. Having done so, a further question may be
put thus:

"'But, friend, there are these six internal and external bases
rightly proclaimed by the Blessed One who knows and sees,
accomplished and fully enlightened. What six? They are the eye
and forms, the ear and sounds, the nose and odours, the tongue
and flavours, the body and tangibles, the mind and mind-
objects. These, friend, are the six internal and external bases
rightly proclaimed by the Blessed One who knows and sees.


906 Chabbisodhana Sutta: Sutta 112


iii 33


accomplished and fully enlightened. How does the venerable
one know, how does he see, regarding these six internal and
external bases, so that through not clinging his mind is liberated
from the taints?'

10. "Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu is one with taints destroyed...
and is completely liberated through final knowledge, this is the
nature of his answer:

'"Friends, with the destruction, fading away, cessation, giving
up, and relinquishing of desire, lust, delight, craving, attraction,
and clinging, and of mental standpoints, adherences, and under-
lying tendencies regarding the eye, forms, eye-consciousness,
and things cognizable [by the mind] through eye-consciousness,
I have understood that my mind is liberated. 1060

"'With the destruction, fading away, cessation, giving up, and
relinquishing of desire, lust, delight, craving, attraction, and
clinging, and of mental standpoints, adherences, and underlying
tendencies regarding the ear, sounds, ear-consciousness, and
things cognizable [by the mind] through ear-consciousness...
regarding the nose, odours, nose-consciousness, and things cog-
nizable [by the mind] through nose-consciousness... regarding
the tongue, flavours, tongue-consciousness, and things cogniz-
able [by the mind] through tongue consciousness... regarding
the body, tangibles, body-consciousness, and things cognizable
[by the mind] through body-consciousness. ..regarding the
mind, mind-objects, mind-consciousness, and things cognizable
[by the mind] through mind-consciousness, I have understood
that my mind is liberated.

'"It is by knowing thus, seeing thus, regarding these six inter-
nal and external bases, that through not clinging my mind is lib-
erated from the taints.'

11. "Saying 'good,' one may delight and rejoice in that
bhikkhu's words. Having done so, a further question may be
put thus:

"'But, friend, how does the venerable one know, how does he
see, so that in regard to this body with its consciousness and all
external signs, I-making, mine-making, and the underlying ten-
dency to conceit have been eradicated in him?' 1061 [33]

12. "Bhikkhus, when a bhikkhu is one with taints destroyed-
and is completely liberated through final knowledge, this is the
nature of his answer:


iii 36


The Sixfold Purity 907


"'Friends, formerly when I lived the home life I was ignorant.
Then the Tathagata or his disciple taught me the Dhamma. On
hearing the Dhamma I acquired faith in the Tathagata.
Possessing that faith, I considered thus: "Household life is
crowded and dusty; life gone forth is wide open. It is not easy
while living in a home to lead the holy life utterly perfect and
pure as a polished shell. Suppose I shave off my hair and beard,
put on the yellow robe, and go forth from the home life into
homelessness." On a later occasion, abandoning a small or a
large fortune, abandoning a small or a large circle of relations, I
shaved off my hair and beard, put on the yellow robe, and went
forth from the home life into homelessness.

13-17. "'Having thus gone forth and possessing the bhikkhus'
training and way of life... (as Sutta 51, §§14^19) [34, 35]... I puri-
fied my mind from doubt. [36]

18. "'Having thus abandoned these five hindrances, imperfec-
tions of the mind that weaken wisdom, quite secluded from
sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome states, I entered
upon and abided in the first jhana, which is accompanied by
applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born
of seclusion. With the stilling of applied and sustained thought,
I entered upon and abided in the second jhana. . .With the fading
away as well of rapture. . .1 entered upon and abided in the third
jhana... With the abandoning of pleasure and pain... I entered
upon and abided in the fourth jhana, which has neither-pain-
nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.

19. "'When my concentrated mind was thus purified, bright,
unblemished, rid of imperfections, malleable, wieldy, steady,
and attained to imperturbability, I directed it to knowledge of
the destruction of the taints. 1062 I directly knew as it actually is:
"This is suffering"... "This is the origin of suffering "..."This is’
the cessation of suffering"... "This is the way leading to the ces-
sation of suffering." I directly knew as it actually is: "These are
the taints "..."This is the origin of the taints"... "This is the cessa-
tion of the taints"... "This is the way leading to the cessation of
the taints."

20. "'When I knew and saw thus, my mind was liberated from
the taint of sensual desire, from the taint of being, and from the
taint of ignorance. When it was liberated there came the knowl-
edge: "It is liberated." I directly knew: "Birth is destroyed, the


908 Chabbisodhana Sutta: Sutta 112


iii 37


holy life has been lived/ what had to be done has been done,
there is no more coming to any state of being."

"'It is by knowing thus, seeing thus, friends, that in regard to
this body with its consciousness and all external signs, I-making,
mine-making, and the underlying tendency to conceit have been
eradicated in me.'

21. "Saying 'good,' bhikkhus, one may delight and rejoice in
that bhikkhu's words. Having done so, one should say to him: 'It
is a gain for us, friend, [37] it is a great gain for us, friend, that we
see such a companion in the holy life as the venerable one.'" 1063

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


113 Sappurisa Sutta
The True Man


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There he
addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, I shall teach you the character of a true man and
the character of an untrue man. 1064 Listen and attend closely to
what I shall say." - "Yes, venerable sir," the bhikkhus replied.
The Blessed One said this:

3. "Bhikkhus, what is the character of an untrue man? Here an
untrue man who has gone forth from an aristocratic family con-
siders thus: 'I have gone forth from an aristocratic family; but
these other bhikkhus have not gone forth from aristocratic fami-
lies.' So he lauds himself and disparages others because of his
aristocratic family. This is the character of an untrue man.

"But a true man considers thus: 'It is not because of one's aris-
tocratic family that states of greed, hatred, or delusion are
destroyed. Even though someone may not have gone forth from
an aristocratic family, yet if he has entered upon the way that
accords with the Dhamma, entered upon the proper way, [38]
and conducts himself according to the Dhamma, he should be
honoured for that, he should be praised for that.' So, putting the
practice of the way first, he neither lauds himself nor disparages
others because of his aristocratic family. This is the character of
a true man.

4-6. "Moreover, an untrue man who has gone forth from a
great family... from a wealthy family... from an influential fami-
ly considers thus: 'I have gone forth from an influential family;
but these other bhikkhus have not gone forth from influential
families.' So he lauds himself and disparages others because of
his influential family. This too is the character of an untrue man.


909


iii 40





910 Sappurisa Sutta: Sutta 113


"But a true man considers thus: 'It is not because of one's
influential family that states of greed, hatred, or delusion are
destroyed. Even though someone may not have gone forth from
an influential family, yet if he has entered upon the way that
accords with the Dhamma, entered upon the proper way, and
conducts himself according to the Dhamma, he should be hon-
oured for that, he should be praised for that.' So, putting the
practice of the way first, he neither lauds himself nor disparages
others because of his influential family. This too is the character
of a true man.

7. "Moreover, an untrue man who is well known and famous
considers thus: 'I am well known and famous; but these other
bhikkhus are unknown and of no account.' So he lauds himself
and disparages others because of his renown. This too is the
character of an untrue man.

"But a true man considers thus: 'It is not because of one's
renown that states of greed, hatred, or delusion are destroyed.
Even though someone may not be well known and famous, yet
if he has entered upon the way that accords with the Dhamma,
entered upon the proper way, and conducts himself according
to the Dhamma, he should be honoured for that, he should be
praised for that.' So, putting the practice of the way first, he nei-
ther lauds himself nor disparages others because of his renown.
This too is the character of a true man. [39]

8. "Moreover, an untrue man who gains robes, almsfood, rest-
ing places, and requisites of medicine considers thus: 'I gain
robes, almsfood, resting places, and requisites of medicine; but
these other bhikkhus do not gain these things.' So he lauds him-
self and disparages others because of gain. This too is the char-
acter of an untrue man.

"But a true man considers thus: 'It is not because of gain that
states of greed, hatred, or delusion are destroyed. Even though
someone has no gain, yet if he has entered upon the way that
accords with the Dhamma, entered upon the proper way, and
conducts himself according to the Dhamma, he should be hon-
oured for that, he should be praised for that.' So, putting the
practice of the way first, he neither lauds himself nor disparages
others because of gain. This too is the character of a true man.

9-20. "Moreover, an untrue man who is learned. . .who is expert
in the Discipline. . .[40]. . .who is a preacher of the Dhamma. . .who



iii 43


The True Man 911


is a forest dweller. ..who is a refuse-rag wearer.. .[41], ..an alms-
food eater. ..a tree-root dweller.. .[42]... a charnel-ground
dweller... an open-air dweller... a continual sitter... an any-bed
user... a one-session eater considers thus: 'I am a one-session
eater; but these other bhikkhus are not one-session eaters.' 1065 So
he lauds himself and disparages others because of his being a
one-session eater. This too is the character of an untrue man.

"But an untrue man considers thus: 'It is not because of
being a one-session eater that states of greed, hatred, or delu-
sion are destroyed. Even though someone may not be a one-
session eater, yet if he has entered upon the way that accords
with the Dhamma, entered upon the proper way, and conducts
himself according to the Dhamma, he should be honoured for
that, he should be praised for that.' So, putting the practice of
the way first, he neither lauds himself nor disparages others
because of his being a one-session eater. This too is the character
of a true man.

21. "Moreover, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unwholesome states, an untrue man enters upon and
abides in the first jhana, which is accompanied by applied and
sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure bom of seclusion.
He considers thus: 'I have gained the attainment of the first
jhana; but these other bhikkhus have not gained the attainment
of the first jhana.' So he lauds himself and disparages others
because of his attainment of the first jhana. This too is the char-
acter of an untrue man.

"But a true man considers thus: 'Non-identification even with
the attainment of the first jhana has been declared by the Blessed
One; for in whatever way they conceive, the fact is ever other
than that.' 1066 [43] So, putting non-identification first, he neither
lauds himself nor disparages others because of his attainment of
the first jhana. This too is the character of a true man.

22-24. "Moreover, with the stilling of applied and sustained
thought, an untrue man enters upon and abides in the second
jhana. . .With the fading away as well of rapture. . .he enters upon
and abides in the third jhana. . .With the abandoning of pleasure
and pain. . .he enters upon and abides in the fourth jhana. . .

25. "Moreover, with the complete surmounting of perceptions
of form, with the disappearance of perceptions of sensory
impact, with non-attention to perceptions of diversity, aware




912 Sappurisa Sutta: Sutta 113


iii 45


that 'space is infinite,' an untrue man enters upon and abides in
the base of infinite space. . .

26. "Moreover, by completely surmounting the base of infinite
space, aware that 'consciousness is infinite,' an untrue man enters
upon and abides in the base of infinite consciousness. . . [44], . .

27. "Moreover, by completely surmounting the base of infinite
consciousness, aware that 'there is nothing,' an untrue man
enters upon and abides in the base of nothingness. . .

28. "Moreover, by completely surmounting the base of noth-
ingness, an untrue man enters upon and abides in the base of
neither-perception-nor-non-perception. He considers thus: 'I
have gained the attainment of the base of neither-perception-
nor-non-perception; but these other bhikkhus have not gained
the attainment of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-percep-
tion.' So he lauds himself and disparages others because of his
attainment of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
This too is the character of an untrue man.

"But a true man considers thus: 'Non-identification even
with the attainment of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-
perception has been declared by the Blessed One; for in what-
ever way they conceive, the fact is ever other than that.' So,
putting non-identification first, he neither lauds himself nor
disparages others because of his attainment of the base of neither-
perception-nor-non-perception. This too is the character of a true
man. [45]

29. "Moreover, by completely surmounting the base of neither-
perception-nor-non-perception, a true man enters upon and
abides in the cessation of perception and feeling. 1057 And his
taints are destroyed by his seeing with wisdom. This bhikkhu
does not conceive anything, he does not conceive in regard to
anything, he does not conceive in any way." 1068

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


114 Sevitabbasevitabba Sutta
To Be Cultivated and Not To Be
Cultivated


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Savatthl in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There he
addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, I shall teach you a discourse on what should be
cultivated and what should not be cultivated. Listen and attend
closely to what I shall say." - "Yes, venerable sir," the bhikkhus
replied. The Blessed One said this:

(first exposition)

3. "Bhikkhus, 1069 bodily conduct is of two kinds, I say: to be cul-
tivated and not to be cultivated. And bodily conduct is either
the one or the other. 1070 Verbal conduct is of two kinds, I say: to
be cultivated and not to be cultivated. And verbal conduct is
either the one or the other. Mental conduct is of two kinds, I say:
to be cultivated and not to be cultivated. And mental conduct is
either the one or the other. Inclination of mind is of two kinds,
I say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated. And inclination’
of mind is either the one or the other. [46] The acquisition of
perception is of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not to be
cultivated. And the acquisition of perception is either the one or
the other. The acquisition of view is of two kinds, I say: to be cul-
tivated and not to be cultivated. And the acquisition of view is
either the one or the other. The acquisition of individuality is of
two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated. And
the acquisition of individuality is either the one or the other."


913


iii 47



914 Sevitabbasevitabba Sutta: Sutta 114

(first elaboration)

4. When this was said, the venerable Sariputta said to the
Blessed One: "Venerable sir, I understand the detailed meaning
of the Blessed One's utterance, which he has spoken in brief
without expounding the detailed meaning, to be thus:

5. "'Bhikkhus, bodily conduct is of two kinds, I say: to be culti-
vated and not to be cultivated. And bodily conduct is either the
one or the other.' So it was said by the Blessed One. And with
reference to what was this said?

"Venerable sir, such bodily conduct as causes unwholesome
states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who
cultivates it should not be cultivated. But such bodily conduct as
causes unwholesome states to diminish and wholesome states to
increase in one who cultivates it should be cultivated.

"And what kind of bodily conduct causes unwholesome states
to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who culti-
vates it? Here someone kills living beings; he is murderous,
bloody-handed, given to blows and violence, merciless to living
beings. He takes what is not given; he takes by way of theft the
wealth and property of others in the village or in the forest. He
misconducts himself in sensual pleasures; he has intercourse
with such women as are protected by their mother, father, mother
and father, brother, sister, or relatives, who have a husband,
who are protected by law, and even with those who are garlanded
in token of betrothal. Such bodily conduct [47] causes unwhole-
some states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one
who cultivates it.

"And what kind of bodily conduct causes unwholesome states
to diminish and wholesome states to increase in one who culti-
vates it? Here someone, abandoning the killing of living beings,
abstains from killing living beings; with rod and weapon laid
aside, gently and kindly, he abides compassionate to all living
beings. Abandoning the taking of what is not given, he abstains
from taking what is not given; he does not take by way of theft
the wealth and property of others in the village or in the forest.
Abandoning misconduct in sensual pleasures, he abstains from
misconduct in sensual pleasures; he does not have intercourse
with such women as are protected by their mother, father, mother
and father, brother, sister, or relatives, who have a husband.


iii 48


To Be Cultivated and Not To Be Cultivated 915


who are protected by law, or with those who are garlanded in
token of betrothal. Such bodily conduct causes unwholesome
states to diminish and wholesome states to increase in one who
cultivates it.

"So it was with reference to this that it was said by the Blessed
One: 'Bhikkhus, bodily conduct is of two kinds, I say: to be culti-
vated and not to be cultivated. And bodily conduct is either the
one or the other/

6. "'Bhikkhus, verbal conduct is of two kinds, I say: to be culti-
vated and not to be cultivated. And verbal conduct is either the
one or the other.' So it was said by the Blessed One. And with
reference to what was this said?

"Venerable sir, such verbal conduct as causes unwholesome
states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who
cultivates it should not be cultivated. But such verbal conduct as
causes unwholesome states to diminish and wholesome states to
increase in one who cultivates it should be cultivated.

"And what kind of verbal conduct causes unwholesome
states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who
cultivates it? Here someone speaks falsehood; when summoned
to a court, or to a meeting, [48] or to his relatives' presence, or
to his guild, or to the royal family's presence, and questioned as
a witness thus: 'So, good man, tell what you know,' not know-
ing, he says, 'I know/ or knowing, he says, 'I do not know'; not
seeing, he says, 'I see/ or seeing, he says, 'I do not see'; in full
awareness he speaks falsehood for his own ends, or for another's
ends, or for some trifling worldly end. He speaks maliciously;
he repeats elsewhere what he has heard here in order to divide
[those people] from these, or he repeats to these people what he
has heard elsewhere in order to divide [these people] from
those; thus he is one who divides those who are united, a cre-
ator of divisions, who enjoys discord, rejoices in discord,
delights in discord, a speaker of words that create discord. He
speaks harshly; he utters such words as are rough, hard, hurtful
to others, offensive to others, bordering on anger, unconducive
to concentration. He is a gossip; he speaks at the wrong time,
speaks what is not fact, speaks what is useless, speaks contrary
to the Dhamma and the Discipline; at the wrong time he
speaks such words as are worthless, unreasonable, immoder-
ate, and unbeneficial. Such verbal conduct causes unwholesome


916 Sevitabbasevitabba Sutta: Sutta 114


iii 49


states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who
cultivates it.

"And what kind of verbal conduct causes unwholesome states
to diminish and wholesome states to increase in one who culti-
vates it? Here someone, abandoning false speech, abstains from
false speech; when summoned to a court, or to a meeting, or to
his relatives' presence, or to his guild, or to the royal family's
presence, and questioned as a witness thus: 'So, good man, tell
what you know,' not knowing, he says, 'I do not know,' or
knowing, he says, 'I know'; not seeing, he says, 'I do not see,' or
seeing, he says, 'I see'; [49] he does not in full awareness speak
falsehood for his own ends, or for another's ends, or for some
trifling worldly end. Abandoning malicious speech, he abstains
from malicious speech; he does not repeat elsewhere what he
has heard here in order to divide [those people] from these, nor
does he repeat to these people what he has heard elsewhere in
order to divide [these people] from those; thus he is one who
reunites those who are divided, a promoter of friendships, who
enjoys concord, rejoices in concord, delights in concord, a speaker
of words that promote concord. Abandoning harsh speech, he
abstains from harsh speech; he speaks such words as are gentle,
pleasing to the ear, and loveable, as go to the heart, are courte-
ous, desired by many, and agreeable to many. Abandoning gos-
sip, he abstains from gossip; he speaks at the right time, speaks
what is fact, speaks on what is good, speaks on the Dhamma
and the Discipline; at the right time he speak’s such words as are
worth recording, reasonable, moderate, and beneficial. Such ver-
bal conduct causes unwholesome states to diminish and whole-
some states to increase in one who cultivates it.

"So it was with reference to this that it was said by the Blessed
One: 'Bhikkhus, verbal conduct is of two kinds, I say: to be culti-
vated and not to be cultivated. And verbal conduct is either the
one or the other.'

7. "'Mental conduct is of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and
not to be cultivated. And mental conduct is either the one or the
other.' So it was said by the Blessed One. And with reference to
what was this said?

"Venerable sir, such mental conduct as causes unwholesome
states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who
cultivates it should not be cultivated. But such mental conduct


iii 50


To Be Cultivated and Not To Be Cultivated 917


as causes unwholesome states to diminish and wholesome states
to increase in one who cultivates it should be cultivated.

"And what kind of mental conduct causes unwholesome
states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who
cultivates it? Here someone is covetous; he covets the wealth
and property of others thus: 'Oh, may what belongs to another
be mine!' Or he has a mind of ill will and intentions of hate [50]
thus: 'May these beings be slain and slaughtered, may they be
cut off, perish, or be annihilated!' Such mental conduct causes
unwholesome states to increase and wholesome states to dimin-
ish in one who cultivates it.

"And what kind of mental conduct causes unwholesome
states to diminish and wholesome states to increase in one who
cultivates it? Here someone is not covetous; he does not covet
the wealth and property of others thus: 'Oh, may what belongs
to another be mine!' His mind is without ill will and he has
intentions free from hate thus: 'May these beings be free from
enmity, affliction, and anxiety! May they live happily!' Such
mental conduct causes unwholesome states to diminish and
wholesome states to increase in one who cultivates it.

"So it was with reference to this that it was said by the Blessed
One: 'Bhikkhus, mental conduct is of two kinds, I say: to be cul-
tivated and not to be cultivated. And mental conduct is either
the one or the other.' 1071

8. "'Inclination of mind is of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated
and not to be cultivated. And inclination of mind is either the
one or the other.' So it was said by the Blessed One. And with
reference to what was this said?

"Venerable sir, such inclination of mind as causes unwhole-
some states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in
one who cultivates it should not be cultivated. But such inclina-
tion of mind as causes unwholesome states to diminish and
wholesome states to increase in one who cultivates it should be
cultivated.

"And what kind of inclination of mind causes unwholesome
states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who
cultivates it? Here someone is covetous and abides with his
mind imbued with covetousness; he has ill will and abides with
his mind imbued with ill will; he is cruel and abides with his
mind imbued with cruelty. 1072 Such inclination of mind causes


iii 51


918 Sevitabbasevitabba Sutta: Sutta 114


unwholesome states to increase and wholesome states to dimin-
ish in one who cultivates it.

"And what kind of inclination of mind causes unwholesome
states to diminish and wholesome states to increase [51] in one
who cultivates it? Here someone is uncovetous and abides with
his mind detached from covetousness; he is without ill will and
abides with his mind detached from ill will; he is uncruel and
abides with his mind detached from cruelty. Such inclination of
mind causes unwholesome states to diminish and wholesome
states to increase in one who cultivates it.

"So it was with reference to this that it was said by the Blessed
One: 'Bhikkhus, inclination of mind is of two kinds, I say: to be
cultivated and not to be cultivated. And inclination of mind is
either the one or the other.'

9. "'The acquisition of perception is of two kinds, I say: to be
cultivated and not to be cultivated. And the acquisition of per-
ception is either the one or the other.' So it was said by the
Blessed One. And with reference to what was this said?

"Venerable sir, such acquisition of perception as causes
unwholesome states to increase and wholesome states to diminish
in one who cultivates it should not be cultivated. But such
acquisition of perception as causes unwholesome states to
diminish and wholesome states to increase in one who cultivates
it should be cultivated.

"And what kind of acquisition of perception causes unwhole-
some states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one
who cultivates it? Here someone is covetous and abides with his
perception imbued with covetousness; he has ill will and abides
with his perception imbued with ill will; he is cruel and abides
with his perception imbued with cruelty. Such acquisition of
perception causes unwholesome states to increase and whole-
some states to diminish in one who cultivates it.

"And what kind of acquisition of perception causes unwhole-
some states to diminish and wholesome states to increase in one
who cultivates it? Here someone is uncovetous and abides with
his perception detached from covetousness; he is without ill will
and abides with his perception detached from ill will; he is uncruel
and abides with his perception detached from cruelty. Such
acquisition of perception causes unwholesome states to diminish
and wholesome states to increase in one who cultivates it.


iii 52


To Be Cultivated and Not To Be Cultivated 919


"So it was with reference to this that it was said by the Blessed
One: 'Bhikkhus, the acquisition of perception is of two kinds, I
say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated. And the acquisi-
tion of perception is either the one or the other.' [52]

10. '"The acquisition of view is of two kinds, I say: to be culti-
vated and not to be cultivated. And the acquisition of view is
either the one or the other.' So it was said by the Blessed One.
And with reference to what was this said?

"Venerable sir, such acquisition of view as causes unwhole-
some states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in
one who cultivates it should not be cultivated. But such acquisi-
tion of view as causes unwholesome states to diminish and
wholesome states to increase in one who cultivates it should be
cultivated.

"And what kind of acquisition of view causes unwholesome
states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who
cultivates it? Here someone holds such a view as this: 'There is
nothing given, nothing offered, nothing sacrificed; no fruit or
result of good and bad actions; no this world, no other world; no
mother, no father; no beings who are reborn spontaneously; no
good and virtuous recluses and brahmins in the world who
have realised for themselves by direct knowledge and declare
this world and the other world.' Such acquisition of view causes
unwholesome states to increase and wholesome states to diminish
in one who cultivates it.

"And what kind of acquisition of view causes unwholesome
states to diminish and wholesome states to increase in one who
cultivates it? Here someone holds such a view as this: 'There is
what is given and what is offered and what is sacrificed; there is
fruit and result of good and bad actions; there is this world and
the other world; there is mother and father; there are beings who
are reborn spontaneously; there are good and virtuous recluses
and brahmins in the world who have realised for themselves by
direct knowledge and declare this world and the other world.'
Such acquisition of view causes unwholesome states to diminish
and wholesome states to increase in one who cultivates it.

"So it was with reference to this that it was said by the Blessed
One: 'Bhikkhus, the acquisition of view is of two kinds, I say: to
be cultivated and not to be cultivated. And the acquisition of
view is either the one or the other.'




920 Sevitabbasevitabba Sutta: Sutta 114


iii 55


11. '"The acquisition of individuality is of two kinds, I say: 1073
to be cultivated and not to be cultivated. And the acquisition of
individuality is either the one or the other.' So it was said by the
Blessed One. And with reference to what was this said?

"Venerable sir, [53] such acquisition of individuality as causes
unwholesome states to increase and wholesome states to dimin-
ish in one who cultivates it should not be cultivated. But such
acquisition of individuality as causes unwholesome states to
diminish and wholesome states to increase in one who cultivates
it should be cultivated.

"And what kind of acquisition of individuality causes unwhole-
some states to increase and wholesome states to diminish in one
who cultivates it? When a person generates an acquisition of indi-
viduality that is subject to affliction, unwholesome states increase
and wholesome states diminish in him, preventing him from
putting an end to being. 1074

"And what kind of acquisition of individuality causes unwhole-
some states to diminish and wholesome states to increase in one
who cultivates it? When a person generates an acquisition of indi-
viduality that is free from affliction, unwholesome states diminish
and wholesome states increase in him, enabling him to put an end
to being.

"So it was with reference to this that it was said by the Blessed
One: 'Bhikkhus, the acquisition of individuality is of two kinds,
I say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated. And the acquisi-
tion of individuality is either the one or the other.'

12. "Venerable sir, I understand the detailed meaning of the
Blessed One's utterance, which he has spoken in brief without
expounding the detailed meaning, to be thus.".

(first approval and recapitulation)

13. "Good, good, Sariputta! It is good that you understand the
detailed meaning of my utterance, which I spoke in brief with-
out expounding the detailed meaning, to be thus.

14-20. [54, 55] (In these paragraphs the Buddha repeats verbatim
§§5-11, with the substitution of "Sariputta" for "venerable sir" and
of "by me" for "by the Blessed One.")

21. "Sariputta, the detailed meaning of my utterance, which I
spoke in brief, should be regarded thus.


iii 57


To Be Cultivated and Not To Be Cultivated 921


(second exposition)

22. "Sariputta, forms cognizable by the eye are of two kinds, I
say: [56] to be cultivated and not to be cultivated. 1075 Sounds
cognizable by the ear are of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated
and not to be cultivated. Odours cognizable by the nose are of
two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated.
Flavours cognizable by the tongue are of two kinds, I say: to be
cultivated and not to be cultivated. Tangibles cognizable by the
body are of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not to be culti-
vated. Mind-objects cognizable by the mind are of two kinds, I
say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated."

(second elaboration)

23. When this was said, the venerable Sariputta said to the
Blessed One: "Venerable sir, I understand the detailed meaning
of the Blessed One's utterance, which he has spoken in brief
without expounding the detailed meaning, to be thus:

24. '"Sariputta, forms cognizable by the eye are of two kinds, I
say: [56] to be cultivated and not to be cultivated.' So it was said
by the Blessed One. And with reference to what was this said?

"Venerable sir, such forms cognizable by the eye as cause
unwholesome states to increase and wholesome states to dimin-
ish in one who cultivates them should not be cultivated. But
such forms cognizable by the eye as cause unwholesome states
to diminish and wholesome states to increase in one who culti-
vates them should be cultivated.

"So it was with reference to this that it was said by the Blessed
One: 'Sariputta, forms cognizable by the eye are of two kinds, I
say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated.'

25. "'Sounds cognizable by the ear are of two kinds, I say'. . .

26. "'Odours cognizable by the nose are of two kinds, I say'. . . [57]

27. "'Flavours cognizable by the tongue are of two kinds, I say'. . .

28. "'Tangibles cognizable by the body are of two kinds, I say'. . .

29. "'Mind-objects cognizable by the mind are of two kinds, I
say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated.' So it was said by
the Blessed One. And with reference to what was this said?

"Venerable sir, such mind-objects cognizable by the mind as
cause unwholesome states to increase and wholesome states to


922 Sevitabbasevitabba Sutta: Sutta 114


iii 59


dimmish in one who cultivates them should not be cultivated.
[58] But such mind-objects cognizable by the mind as cause
unwholesome states to diminish and wholesome states to
increase in one who cultivates them should be cultivated.

"So it was with reference to this that it was said by the Blessed
One: 'Mind-objects cognizable by the mind are of two kinds, I
say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated.'

30. "Venerable sir, I understand the detailed meaning of the
Blessed One's utterance, which he has spoken in brief without
expounding the detailed meaning, to be thus."

(second approval and recapitulation)

31. "Good, good, Sariputta! It is good that you understand the
detailed meaning of my utterance, which I spoke in brief with-
out expounding the detailed meaning, to be thus.

32-37. (In these paragraphs the Buddha repeats verbatim §§24r-29,
with the necessary substitutions.)

38. "Sariputta, the detailed meaning of my utterance, which I
spoke in brief, should be regarded thus.

(third exposition)

39. "Sariputta, robes are of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and
not to be cultivated. Almsfood is of two kinds, I say: to be culti-
vated and not to be cultivated. Resting places are of two kinds, I
say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated. Villages are of two
kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated. Towns are
of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not to be cultivated.
Cities are of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not to be culti-
vated. Districts are of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not
to be cultivated. Persons are of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated
and not to be cultivated." [59]

40. When this was said, the venerable Sariputta said to the
Blessed One: "Venerable sir, I understand the detailed meaning
of the Blessed One's utterance, which he has spoken in brief
without expounding the detailed meaning, to be thus:

41. "'Sariputta, robes are of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated
and not to be cultivated.' So it was said by the Blessed One. And
with reference to what was this said?


iii 60


To Be Cultivated and Not To Be Cultivated 923


"Venerable sir, such robes as cause unwholesome states to
increase and wholesome states to diminish in one who cultivates
them should not be cultivated. But such robes as cause
unwholesome states to diminish and wholesome states to
increase in one who cultivates them should be cultivated.

"So it was with reference to this that it was said by the Blessed
One: 'Sariputta, robes are of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated
and not to be cultivated.'

42. "'Almsfood is of two kinds, I say'...

43. '"Resting places are of two kinds, I say'...

44. "'Villages are of two kinds, I say'. . .

45. "'Towns are of two kinds, I say'. . .

46. "'Cities are of two kinds, I say'. . .

47. "'Districts are of two kinds, I say'...

48. "'Persons are of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not
to be cultivated.' So it was said by the Blessed One. And with
reference to what was this said?

"Venerable sir, [association with] such persons as causes
unwholesome states to increase and wholesome states to dimin-
ish in one who cultivates it should not be cultivated. But [associ-
ation with] such persons as causes unwholesome states to
diminish and wholesome states to increase in one who cultivates
it should be cultivated.

"So it was with reference to this that it was said by the Blessed
One: 'Persons are of two kinds, I say: to be cultivated and not to
be cultivated.'

49. "Venerable sir, I understand the detailed meaning of the
Blessed One's utterance, which he has spoken in brief without
expounding the detailed meaning, to be thus."

(third approval and recapitulation)

50. "Good, good, Sariputta! It is good that you understand the
detailed meaning of my utterance, which I spoke in brief with-
out expounding the detailed meaning, to be thus.

51-58. (In these paragraphs the Buddha repeats verbatim §§41^48
with the necessary substitutions.) [60]

59. "Sariputta, the detailed meaning of my utterance, which I
spoke in brief, should be regarded thus.


924 Sevitabbasevitabba Sutta: Sutta 114


iii 61


(conclusion)

60. "Sariputta, if all nobles understood thus the detailed mean-
ing of my utterance, which I spoke in brief, it would lead to
their welfare and happiness for a long time. 1076 If all brah-
mins... all merchants... all workers understood thus the mean-
ing of my utterance, which I spoke in brief, it would lead to
their welfare and happiness for a long time. If the world with
its gods, its Maras, and its Brahmas, this generation with its
recluses and brahmins, its princes and its people, understood
thus the detailed meaning of my utterance, which I spoke in
brief, it would lead to the welfare and happiness of the world
for a long time." [61]

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Sariputta was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


115 Bahudhatuka Sutta
The Many Kinds of Elements


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There he
addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, whatever fears arise, all arise because of the
fool, not because of the wise man; whatever troubles arise, all
arise because of the fool, not because of the wise man; what-
ever calamities arise, all arise because of the fool, not because
of the wise man. Just as a fire that starts in a shed made of
rushes or grass burns down even a house with a peaked roof,
with walls plastered inside and outside, shut off, secured by
bars, with shuttered windows; so too, bhikkhus, whatever
fears arise... all arise because of the fool, not because of the
wise man. Thus the fool brings fear, the wise man brings no
fear; the fool brings trouble, the wise man brings no trouble;
the fool brings calamity, the wise man brings no calamity. No
fear comes from the wise man, no trouble comes from the wise
man, no calamity comes from the wise man. Therefore,
bhikkhus, you should train thus: 'We shall be wise men, we
shall be inquirers.'" [62]

3. When this was said, the venerable Ananda asked the
Blessed One: "In what way, venerable sir, can a bhikkhu be
called a wise man and an inquirer?"

"When, Ananda, a bhikkhu is skilled in the elements, skilled
in the bases, skilled in dependent origination, skilled in what is
possible and what is impossible, in that way he can be called a
wise man and an inquirer."

&


925


926 Bahudhatuka Sutta: Sutta 115


iii 63


(the elements)

4. "But, venerable sir, in what way can a bhikkhu be called
skilled in the elements?"

"There are, Ananda, these eighteen elements: the eye ele-
ment, the form element, the eye-consciousness element; the ear
element, the sound element, the ear-consciousness element; the
nose element, the odour element, the nose-consciousness ele-
ment; the tongue element, the flavour element, the tongue-
consciousness element; the body element, the tangible element,
the body-consciousness element; the mind element, the mind-
object element, the mind-consciousness element. When he
knows and sees these eighteen elements, a bhikkhu can be called
skilled in the elements." 1077

5. "But, venerable sir, might there be another way in which a
bhikkhu can be called skilled in the elements?"

"There might be, Ananda. There are, Ananda, these six ele-
ments: the earth element, the water element, the fire element,
the air element, the space element, and the consciousness ele-
ment. When he knows and sees these six elements, a bhikkhu
can be called skilled in the elements."

6. "But, venerable sir, might there be another way in which a
bhikkhu can be called skilled in the elements?"

"There might be, Ananda. There are, Ananda, these six ele-
ments: the pleasure element, the pain element, the joy element,
the grief element, the equanimity element, and the ignorance
element. When he knows and sees these six elements, a bhikkhu
can be called skilled in the elements." 1078

7. "But, venerable sir, might there be another way in which a
bhikkhu can be called skilled in the elements?"

"There might be, Ananda. There are, Ananda, these six ele-
ments: the sensual desire element, the renunciation element, the
ill will element, the non-ill will element, [63] the cruelty element,
and the non-cruelty element. When he knows and sees these six
elements, a bhikkhu can be called skilled in the elements." 1079

8. "But, venerable sir, might there be another way in which a
bhikkhu can be called skilled in the elements?"

"There might be, Ananda. There are, Ananda, these three ele-
ments: the sense-sphere element, the fine-material element, and


iii 64


The Many Kinds of Elements 927


the immaterial element. When he knows and sees these three
elements, a bhikkhu can be called skilled in the elements." 1080

9. "But, venerable sir, might there be another way in which a
bhikkhu can be called skilled in the elements?"

"There might be, Ananda. There are, Ananda, these two ele-
ments: the conditioned element and the unconditioned element.
When he knows and sees these two elements, a bhikkhu can be
called skilled in the elements." 1081

(the bases)

10. "But, venerable sir, in what way can a bhikkhu be called
skilled in the bases?"

"There are, Ananda, these six internal and external bases: the
eye and forms, the ear and sounds, the nose and odours, the
tongue and flavours, the body and tangibles, the mind and
mind-objects. 1082 When he knows and sees these six internal and
external bases, a bhikkhu can be called skilled in the bases."

(dependent origination)

11. "But, venerable sir, in what way can a bhikkhu be called
skilled in dependent origination?" 1083

"Here, Ananda, a bhikkhu knows thus: 'When this exists, that
comes to be; with the arising of this, that arises. When this does
not exist, that does not come to be; with the cessation of this,
that ceases. That is, with ignorance as condition, formations
[come to be]; with formations as condition, consciousness; with
consciousness as condition, mentality-materiality; with mentality-
materiality as condition, the sixfold base; with the sixfold base
as condition, contact; with contact as condition, feeling; with
feeling as condition, craving; with craving as condition, clinging;
with clinging as condition, [64] being; with being as condition,
birth; with birth as condition, ageing and death, sorrow, lamen-
tation, pain, grief, and despair come to be. Such is the origin of
this whole mass of suffering.

"'But with the remainderless fading away and cessation of
ignorance comes cessation of formations; with the cessation of
formations, cessation of consciousness; with the cessation of


928 Bahudhatuka Sutta: Sutta 115


iii 65


consciousness, cessation of mentality-materiality; with the cessa-
tion of mentality-materiality, cessation of the sixfold base; with the
cessation of the sixfold base, cessation of contact; with the cessa-
tion of contact, cessation of feeling; with the cessation of feeling,
cessation of craving; with the cessation of craving, cessation of
clinging; with the cessation of clinging, cessation of being; with
the cessation of being, cessation of birth; with the cessation of
birth, ageing and death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and
despair cease. Such is the cessation of this whole mass of suffer-
ing.' In this way, Ananda, a bhikkhu can be called skilled in
dependent origination."

(the possible and the impossible)

12. "But, venerable sir, in what way can a bhikkhu be called
skilled in what is possible and what is impossible?"

"Here, Ananda, a bhikkhu understands: 'It is impossible, it
cannot happen that a person possessing right view could treat
any formation as permanent - there is no such possibility.' 1084
And he understands: 'It is possible that an ordinary person
might treat some formation as permanent - there is such a possi-
bility.' He understands: 'It is impossible, it cannot happen that a
person possessing right view could treat any formation as plea-
surable - there is no such possibility.' 1085 And he understands:
'It is possible that an ordinary person might treat some forma-
tion as pleasurable - there is such a possibility.' He understands:
'It is impossible, it cannot happen that a person possessing right
view could treat anything as self - there is no such possibility.'
And he understands: 'It is possible that an ordinary person
might treat something as self - there is such a possibility.' 1086

13. "He understands: 'It is impossible, it cannot happen that a
person possessing right view could deprive his mother of life -
there is no such possibility.' 1087 And he understands: 'It is possible
that an ordinary person might deprive his mother of life - there
is such a possibility.' He understands: 'It is impossible, it cannot
happen that [65] a person possessing right view could deprive
his father of life... could deprive an arahant of life - there is no
such possibility.' And he understands: 'It is possible that an
ordinary person might deprive his father of life... might deprive
an arahant of life - there is such a possibility.' He understands:


iii 66


The Many Kinds of Elements 929


'It is impossible, it cannot happen that a person possessing right
view could, with a mind of hate, shed a Tathagata's blood -
there is no such possibility.' And he understands: 'It is possible
that an ordinary person might, with a mind of hate, shed a
Tathagata's blood - there is such a possibility.' He understands:
'It is impossible, it cannot happen that a person possessing right
view could cause a schism in the Sangha... could acknowledge
another teacher 1088 - there is no such possibility.' And he under-
stands: 'It is possible that an ordinary person might cause a
schism in the Sangha... might acknowledge another teacher -
there is such a possibility.'

14. 'He understands: 'It is impossible, it cannot happen that
two Accomplished Ones, Fully Enlightened Ones, could arise
contemporaneously in one world-system - there is no such pos-
sibility.' 1089 And he understands: 'It is possible that one
Accomplished One, a Fully Enlightened One, might arise in one
world-system - there is such a possibility.' He understands: 'It is
impossible, it cannot happen that two Wheel-turning Monarchs
could arise contemporaneously in one world-system... It is pos-
sible that one Wheel-turning Monarch might arise in one world-
system - there is such a possibility.'

15. "He understands: 'It is impossible, it cannot happen that a
woman could be an Accomplished One, a Fully Enlightened
One - there is no such possibility.' 1090 And he understands: 'It is
possible that a man might be an Accomplished One, a Fully
Enlightened One - there is such a possibility.' He understands:
'It is impossible, it cannot happen that a woman could be a
Wheel-turning Monarch. . .that a woman could occupy the posi-
tion of Sakka [66]... that a woman could occupy the position of
Mara... that a woman could occupy the position of Brahma -
there is no such possibility.' And he understands: 'It is possible
that a man might be a Wheel-turning Monarch... that a man
might occupy the position of Sakka... that a man might occupy
the position of Mara... that a man might occupy the position of
Brahma - there is such a possibility.'

16. "He understands: 'It is impossible, it cannot happen that an
unwished for, undesired, disagreeable result could be produced
from good bodily conduct... from good verbal conduct... from
good mental conduct - there is no such possibility.' And he under-
stands: 'It is possible that a wished for, desired, agreeable result


930 Bahudhatuka Sutta: Sutta 115


iii 67


might be produced from good bodily conduct... from good verbal
conduct. . .from good mental conduct - there is such a possibility.'

17. "He understands: 'It is impossible, it cannot happen that a
person engaging in bodily misconduct [67] . . .engaging in verbal
misconduct... engaging in mental misconduct could on that
account, for that reason, on the dissolution of the body, after
death, reappear in a happy destination, even in the heavenly
world - there is no such possibility.' 1091 And he understands: 'It
is possible that a person engaging in bodily misconduct... engag-
ing in verbal misconduct. . .engaging in mental misconduct might
on that account, for that reason, on the dissolution of the body,
after death, reappear in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy
destination, in perdition, even in hell - there is such a possibility.'

18. "He understands: 'It is impossible, it cannot happen that a
person engaging in good bodily conduct... engaging in good ver-
bal conduct... engaging in good mental conduct could on that
account, for that reason, on the dissolution of the body, after
death, reappear in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destina-
tion, in perdition, even in hell - there is no such possibility.' And
he understands: 'It is possible that a person engaging in good
bodily conduct... engaging in good verbal conduct... engaging in
good mental conduct might on that account, for that reason, on
the dissolution of the body, after death, reappear in a happy des-
tination, even in the heavenly world.'

"In this way, Ananda, a bhikkhu can be called skilled in what
is possible and what is impossible."

(conclusion)

19. When this was said, the venerable Ananda said to the Blessed
One: "It is wonderful, venerable sir, it is marvellous! What is the
name of this discourse on the Dhamma?"

"You may remember this discourse on the Dhamma, Ananda,
as 'The Many Kinds of Elements' and as 'The Four Cycles' 1092 and
as 'The Mirror of the Dhamma' and as 'The Drum of the
Deathless' and as 'The Supreme Victory in Battle.'"

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Ananda was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


116 Isigili Sutta
Isigili: The Gullet of the Seers


[68] 1. Thus have I heard . 1093 On one occasion the Blessed One
was living at Rajagaha, at Isigili - the Gullet of the Seers. There
he addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "You see, bhikkhus, do you not, that mountain Vebhara?" 1094
- "Yes, venerable sir."

"There used to be another name, another designation, for that
mountain Vebhara. You see, bhikkhus, do you not, that moun-
tain Pandava?" - "Yes, venerable sir."

"There used to be another name, another designation, for that
mountain Pandava. You see, bhikkhus, do you not, that moun-
tain Vepulla?" - "Yes, venerable sir."

"There used to be another name, another designation, for that
mountain Vepulla. You see, bhikkhus, do you not, that moun-
tain Gijjhakuta - the Vulture Peak?" - "Yes, venerable sir."

"There used to be another name, another designation, for that
mountain Gijjhakuta - the Vulture Peak. You see, bhikkhus, do
you not, that mountain Isigili - the Gullet of the Seers?" - "Yes,
venerable sir."

3. "There used to be this same name, this same designation,
for this mountain Isigili - the Gullet of the Seers. For in former
times five hundred paccekabuddhas 1095 dwelt long on this
mountain, the Gullet of the Seers. They were seen entering into
this hill; once gone in, they were no longer seen. People who
saw this said: 'This mountain swallows up these seers.' 1096 And
so it was that this came to be named 'The Gullet of the Seers.' I
shall tell you, bhikkhus, the names of the paccekabuddhas, I
shall relate to you the names of the paccekabuddhas, I shall
teach you [69] the names of the paccekabuddhas. Listen and


931


932 Isigili Sutta: Sutta 116


iii 70


attend closely to what I shall say." - "Yes, venerable sir," the
bhikkhus replied. The Blessed One said this:

4. "Bhikkhus, the paccekabuddha Arittha dwelt long on this
mountain Isigili. The paccekabuddha Uparittha dwelt long on
this mountain Isigili. The paccekabuddha Tagarasikhin 1097 ...
Yasassin...Sudassana...Piyadassin...Gandhara...Pindola...
Upasabha...Nltha... Tatha...Sutava...Bhavitatta dwelt long on
this mountain Isigili.

5. "These saintly beings, desireless, rid of suffering.

Who each achieved awakening by himself -
Hear me relate the names of these, the greatest
Of men, who have plucked out the dart [of pain].

Arittha, Uparittha, Tagarasikhin, Yasassin,

Sudassana, and Piyadassin the enlightened,

Gandhara, Pindola, Upasabha as well,

Nltha, Tatha, Sutava, Bhavitatta. [70]

6. "Sumbha, Subha, Methula, and Atthama, 1098
Then Assumegha, Arugha, Sudatha -

And Hingu, and Hinga, the greatly powerful,
Paccekabuddhas no more led to being.

Two sages named Jali, and Atthaka,

Then Kosala the enlightened, then Subahu,

Upanemi, and Nemi, and Santacitta
Right and true, immaculate and wise.

Kala, Upakala, Vijita, and Jita;

Anga, and Panga, and Gutijjita too;

Passin conquered attachment, the root of suffering;

Aparajita conquered Mara's power.

Satthar, Pavattar, Sarabhanga, Lomahamsa,

Uccangamaya, Asita, Anasava,

Manomaya, and Bandhumant the free from pride,
Tadadhimutta stainless and resplendent;


iii 71


Isigili: The Gullet of the Seers 933


Ketumbaraga, Matanga, and Ariya,

Then Accuta, Accutagama, Byamaka,

Sumangala, Dabbila, Supatitthita,

Asayha, Khemabhirata, and Sorata,

Durannaya, Sangha, and then Ujjaya;

Another sage, Sayha, of noble endeavour.

And twelve between - Anandas, Nandas, and Upanandas -
And Bharadvaja bearing his last body;

Then Bodhi, Mahanama the supreme,

Bharadvaja with fair-crested mane;

Tissa and Upatissa not bound to being;

Upasidarin, and Sldarin, free from craving.

Enlightened was Mangala, free from lust;

Usabha cut the net, the root of suffering.

Upanlta attained the state of peace.

Purified, excellent, truly named.

Jeta, Jayanta, Paduma, and Uppala,

Padumuttara, Rakkhita, and Pabbata, [71]

Manatthaddha glorious, Vltaraga

And Kanha enlightened with mind released.

7. “These and also other great and mighty
Paccekabuddhas no more led to being -
Honour these sages who, transcending craving.

Have attained final Nibbana, past all measure."


117 Mahacattansaka Sutta
The Great Forty


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There he
addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, I shall teach you noble right concentration with
its supports and its requisites. 1099 Listen and attend closely to
what I shall say." - "Yes, venerable sir," the bhikkhus replied.
The Blessed One said this:

3. "What, bhikkhus, is noble right concentration with its sup-
ports and its requisites, that is, right view, right intention, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, and right
mindfulness? Unification of mind equipped with these seven
factors is called noble right concentration with its supports and
its requisites.

(view) *

4. "Therein, bhikkhus, right view comes first. 1100 And how does
right view come first? One understands wrong view as wrong
view and right view as right view: this is one's right view. 1101

5. "And what, bhikkhus, is wrong view? 'There is nothing
given, nothing offered, nothing sacrificed; no fruit or result of
good and bad actions; no this world, no other world; no mother,
no father; no beings who are reborn spontaneously; no [72] good
and virtuous recluses and brahmins in the world who have
realised for themselves by direct knowledge and declare this
world and the other world.' This is wrong view.

6. "And what, bhikkhus, is right view? Right view, I say, is
twofold: there is right view that is affected by taints, partaking
of merit, ripening on the side of attachment; 1102 and there is


934


iii 73


The Great Forty 935


right view that is noble, taintless, supramundane, a factor of
the path.

7. "And what, bhikkhus, is right view that is affected by the
taints, partaking of merit, ripening on the side of attachment?
'There is what is given and what is offered and what is sacri-
ficed; there is fruit and result of good and bad actions; there is
this world and the other world; there is mother and father; there
are beings who are reborn spontaneously; there are in the world
good and virtuous recluses and brahmins who have realised for
themselves by direct knowledge and declare this world and the
other world.' This is right view affected by taints, partaking of
merit, ripening on the side of attachment.

8. "And what, bhikkhus, is right view that is noble, taintless,
supramundane, a factor of the path? The wisdom, the faculty of
wisdom, the power of wisdom, the investigation-of-states
enlightenment factor, the path factor of right view in one whose
mind is noble, whose mind is taintless, who possesses the noble
path and is developing the noble path: 1103 this is right view that
is noble, taintless, supramundane, a factor of the path.

9. "One makes an effort to abandon wrong view and to enter
upon right view: this is one's right effort. Mindfully one aban-
dons wrong view, mindfully one enters upon and abides in
right view: this is one's right mindfulness. Thus these three
states run and circle around right view, that is, right view, right
effort, and right mindfulness. 1104

(intention)

10. "Therein, bhikkhus, right view comes first. And how does
right view come first? One understands wrong intention as
wrong intention and right intention as right intention: this i’s
one's [73] right view. 1105

11. "And what, bhikkhus, is wrong intention? The intention of
sensual desire, the intention of ill will, and the intention of
cruelty: this is wrong intention.

12. "And what, bhikkhus, is right intention? Right intention, I
say, is twofold: there is right intention that is affected by taints,
partaking of merit, ripening on the side of attachment, and there
is right intention that is noble, taintless, supramundane, a factor
of the path.


936 Mahacattansaka Sutta: Sutta 117


iii 74


13. "And what, bhikkhus, is right intention that is affected by
taints, partaking of merit, ripening on the side of attachment?
The intention of renunciation, the intention of non-ill will, and
the intention of non-cruelty: 110 * this is right intention that is
affected by taints. . .on the side of attachment.

14. "And what, bhikkhus, is right intention that is noble, taint-
less, supramundane, a factor of the path? The thinking, thought,
intention, mental absorption, mental fixity, directing of mind,
verbal formation in one whose mind is noble, whose mind is
taintless, who possesses the noble path and is developing the
noble path: 1107 this is right intention that is noble... a factor of
the path.

15. "One makes an effort to abandon wrong intention and to
enter upon right intention: this is one's right effort. Mindfully
one abandons wrong intention, mindfully one enters upon and
abides in right intention: this is one's right mindfulness. Thus
these three states run and circle around right intention, that is,
right view, right effort, and right mindfulness. 1108

(speech)

16. "Therein, bhikkhus, right view comes first. And how does
right view come first? One understands wrong speech as wrong
speech and right speech as right speech: this is one's right view.

17. "And what, bhikkhus, is wrong speech? .False speech, mali-
cious speech, harsh speech, and gossip: this is wrong speech.

18. "And what, bhikkhus, is right speech? Right speech, I say,
is twofold: there is right speech that is affected by taints, partak-
ing of merit, ripening on the side of attachment; and there is [74]
right speech that is noble, taintless, supramundane, a factor of
the path.

19. "And what, bhikkhus, is right speech that is affected by
taints, partaking of merit, ripening on the side of attachment?
Abstinence from false speech, abstinence from malicious speech,
abstinence from harsh speech, abstinence from gossip: this is
right speech that is affected by taints. . .on the side of attachment.

20. "And what, bhikkhus, is right speech that is noble, taint-
less, supramundane, a factor of the path? The desisting from the
four kinds of verbal misconduct, the abstaining, refraining,
abstinence from them in one whose mind is noble, whose mind


iii 75


The Great Forty 937


is taintless, who possesses the noble path and is developing the
noble path: 1109 this is right speech that is noble... a factor of the
path.

21. "One makes an effort to abandon wrong speech and to
enter upon right speech: this is one's right effort. Mindfully one
abandons wrong speech, mindfully one enters upon and abides
in right speech: this is one's right mindfulness. Thus these three
states run and circle around right speech, that is, right view,
right effort, and right mindfulness.

(action)

22. "Therein, bhikkhus, right view comes first. And how does
right view come first? One understands wrong action as wrong
action and right action as right action: this is one's right view.

23. "And what, bhikkhus, is wrong action? Killing living
beings, taking what is not given, and misconduct in sensual
pleasures: this is wrong action.

24. "And what, bhikkhus, is right action? Right action, I say, is
twofold: there is right action that is affected by taints, partaking
of merit, ripening on the side of attachment; and there is right
action that is noble, taintless, supramundane, a factor of the path.

25. "And what, bhikkhus, is right action that is affected by
taints, partaking of merit, ripening on the side of attachment?
Abstinence from killing living beings, abstinence from taking
what is not given, abstinence from misconduct in sensual plea-
sures: this is right action that is affected by taints... on the side of
attachment.

26. "And what, bhikkhus, is right action that is noble, taintless,
supramundane, a factor of the path? The desisting from the three
kinds of bodily misconduct, the abstaining, refraining, abstinence
from them in one whose mind is noble, whose mind is taintless,
who possesses the noble path and is developing the noble path:
this is right action [75] that is noble. . .a factor of the path.

27. "One makes an effort to abandon wrong action and to
enter upon right action: this is one's right effort. Mindfully one
abandons wrong action, mindfully one enters upon right action:
this is one's right mindfulness. Thus these three states run and
circle around right action, that is, right view, right effort, and
right mindfulness.


938 Mahacattansaka Sutta: Sutta 117


iii 76


(livelihood)

28. "Therein, bhikkhus, right view comes first. And how does
right view come first? One understands wrong livelihood as
wrong livelihood and right livelihood as right livelihood: this is
one's right view.

29. "And what, bhikkhus, is wrong livelihood? Scheming,
talking, hinting, belittling, pursuing gain with gain: this is
wrong livelihood. 1110

30. "And what, bhikkhus, is right livelihood? Right livelihood,
I say, is twofold: there is right livelihood that is affected by
taints, partaking of merit, ripening on the side of attachment;
and there is right livelihood that is noble, taintless, supramun-
dane, a factor of the path.

31. "And what, bhikkhus, is right livelihood that is affected by
taints, partaking of merit, ripening on the side of attachment?
Here, bhikkhus, a noble disciple abandons wrong livelihood
and gains his living by right livelihood: this is right livelihood
that is affected by taints. . .on the side of attachment.

32. "And what, bhikkhus, is right livelihood that is noble,
taintless, supramundane, a factor of the path? The desisting
from wrong livelihood, the abstaining, refraining, abstinence
from it in one whose mind is noble, whose mind is taintless,
who possesses the noble path and is developing the noble path:
this is right livelihood that is noble... a factor of the path.

33. "One makes an effort to abandon wrong livelihood and to
enter upon right livelihood: this is one's right effort. Mindfully
one abandons wrong livelihood, mindfully one enters upon
right livelihood: this is one's right mindfulness. Thus these three
states run and circle around right livelihood, that is, right view,
right effort, and right mindfulness.

(the great forty)

34. "Therein, bhikkhus, right view comes first. And how does
right view come first? [76] In one of right view, right intention
comes into being; 1111 in one of right intention, right speech
comes into being; in one of right speech, right action comes into
being; in one of right action, right livelihood comes into being;
in one of right livelihood, right effort comes into being; in one of


iii 78


The Great Forty 939


right effort, right mindfulness comes into being; in one of right
mindfulness, right concentration comes into being; in one of
right concentration, right knowledge comes into being; in one of
right knowledge, right deliverance comes into being. Thus,
bhikkhus, the path of the disciple in higher training possesses
eight factors, the arahant possesses ten factors. 1112

35. "Therein, bhikkhus, right view comes first. And how does
right view come first? In one of right view, wrong view is abol-
ished, and the many evil unwholesome states that originate with
wrong view as condition are also abolished, and the many
wholesome states that originate with right view as condition
come to fulfilment by development.

"In one of right intention, wrong intention is abolished, and
the many evil unwholesome states that originate with wrong
intention as condition are also abolished, and the many whole-
some states that originate with right intention as condition come
to fulfilment by development.

"In one of right speech, wrong speech is abolished... In one of
right action, wrong action is abolished... In one of right liveli-
hood, wrong livelihood is abolished [77]... In one of right effort,
wrong effort is abolished... In one of right mindfulness, wrong
mindfulness is abolished... In one of right concentration, wrong
concentration is abolished... In one of right knowledge, wrong
knowledge is abolished... In one of right deliverance, wrong
deliverance is abolished, and the many evil unwholesome states
that originate with wrong deliverance as condition are also abol-
ished, and the many wholesome states that originate with right
deliverance as condition come to fulfilment by development.

36. "Thus, bhikkhus, there are twenty factors on the side of the
wholesome, and twenty factors on the side of the unwhole-
some. 1113 This Dhamma discourse on the Great Forty has been
set rolling and cannot be stopped by any recluse or brahmin or
god or Mara or Brahma or anyone in the world.

37. "Bhikkhus, if any recluse or brahmin thinks that this
Dhamma discourse on the Great Forty should be censured and
rejected, then there are ten legitimate deductions from his asser-
tions that would provide grounds for censuring him here and
now. If that worthy one censures right view, then he would hon-
our and praise those recluses and brahmins who are of wrong
view. If that worthy one censures right intention, [78] then he



iii 78


940 Mahacattansaka Sutta: Sutta 117


would honour and praise those recluses and brahmins who are
of wrong intention. If that worthy one censures right speech...
right action... right livelihood... right effort... right mindful-
ness... right concentration... right knowledge... right deliverance,
then he would honour and praise those recluses and brahmins
who are of wrong deliverance. If any recluse or brahmin thinks
that this Dhamma discourse on the Great Forty should be cen-
sured and rejected, then these are ten legitimate deductions
from his assertions that would provide grounds for censuring
him here and now.

38. "Bhikkhus, even those teachers from Okkala, Vassa and
Bhanna, 1114 who held the doctrine of non-causality, the doc-
trine of non-doing, and the doctrine of nihilism, would not
think that this Dhamma discourse on the Great Forty should be
censured and rejected. Why is that? For fear of blame, attack,
and confutation."

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.



J


118 Anapanasati Sutta
Mindfulness of Breathing


(introductory section)

1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was living
at SavatthI in the Eastern Park, in the Palace of Migara's Mother,
together with many very well-known elder disciples - the vener-
able Sariputta, the venerable Maha Moggallana, the venerable
Maha Kassapa, the venerable Maha Kaccana, the venerable Maha
Kotthita, the venerable Maha Kappina, the venerable Maha
Cunda, [79] the venerable Anuruddha, the venerable Revata, the
venerable Ananda, and other very well-known elder disciples.

2. Now on that occasion elder bhikkhus had been teaching
and instructing new bhikkhus; some elder bhikkhus had been
teaching and instructing ten new bhikkhus, some elder
bhikkhus had been teaching and instructing twenty... thirty...
forty new bhikkhus. And the new bhikkhus, taught and
instructed by the elder bhikkhus, had achieved successive stages
of high distinction.

3. On that occasion - the Uposatha day of the fifteenth, on the
full-moon night of the Pavarana ceremony 1115 - the Blessed One
was seated in the open surrounded by the Sangha of bhikkhus.
Then, surveying the silent Sangha of bhikkhus, he addressed
them thus:

4. "Bhikkhus, I am content with this progress. My mind is con-
tent with this progress. So arouse still more energy to attain the
unattained, to achieve the unachieved, to realise the unrealised.
I shall wait here at SavatthI for the Komudl full moon of the
fourth month." 1116

5. The bhikkhus of the countryside heard: "The Blessed One
will wait there at SavatthI for the Komudl full moon of the


941


942 Anapanasati Sutta: Sutta 118

fourth month." And the bhikkhus of the countryside left in due
course for SavatthI to see the Blessed One.

6. And elder bhikkhus still more intensively taught and
instructed nevv bhikkhus; some elder bhikkhus taught and
instructed ten new bhikkhus, some elder bhikkhus taught and
instructed twenty... thirty... forty new bhikkhus. And the new
bhikkhus, taught and instructed by the elder bhikkhus, [80]
achieved successive stages of high distinction.

7. On that occasion - the Uposatha day of the fifteenth, the
full-moon night of the Komudl full moon of the fourth month -
the Blessed One was seated in the open surrounded by the
Sangha of bhikkhus. Then, surveying the silent Sangha of
bhikkhus, he addressed them thus:

8. "Bhikkhus, this assembly is free from prattle, this assembly

is free from chatter. It consists purely of heartwood. Such is this
Sangha of bhikkhus, such is this assembly. Such an assembly as
is worthy of gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings,
worthy of reverential salutation, an incomparable field of merit
for the world - such is this Sangha of bhikkhus, such is this
assembly. Such an assembly that a small gift given to it becomes
great and a great gift greater - such is this Sangha of bhikkhus,
such is this assembly. Such an assembly as is rare for the world
to see - such is this Sangha of bhikkhus, such is this assembly.
Such an assembly as would be worth journeying many leagues
with a travel-bag to see - such is this Sangha of bhikkhus, such
is this assembly. .

9. "In this Sangha of bhikkhus there are bhikkhus who are ara-
hants with taints destroyed, who have lived the holy life, done
what had to be done, laid down the burden, reached the true
goal, destroyed the fetters of being, and are completely liberated
through final knowledge - such bhikkhus are there in this
Sangha of bhikkhus.

10. "In this Sangha of bhikkhus there are bhikkhus who, with
the destruction of the five lower fetters, are due to reappear
spontaneously [in the Pure Abodes] and there attain final
Nibbana, without ever returning from that world - such
bhikkhus are there in this Sangha of bhikkhus.

11. "In this Sangha of bhikkhus there are bhikkhus who, with
the destruction of three fetters and with the attenuation of lust,
hate, and delusion, are once-returners, returning once to this




iii 80


iii 82


Mindfulness of Breathing 943


world [81] to make an end of suffering - such bhikkhus are there
in this Sangha of bhikkhus.

12. "In this Sangha of bhikkhus there are bhikkhus who, with
the destruction of the three fetters, are stream-enterexs, no longer
subject to perdition, bound [for deliverance], headed for enlight-
enment - such bhikkhus are there in this Sangha of bhikkhus.

13. "In this Sangha of bhikkhus there are bhikkhus who abide
devoted to the development of the four foundations of mindful-
ness - such bhikkhus are there in this Sangha of bhikkhus. In this
Sangha of bhikkhus there are bhikkhus who abide devoted to the
development of the four right kinds of striving... of the four
bases for spiritual power... of the five faculties... of the five pow-
ers... of the seven enlightenment factors... of the Noble Eightfold
Path - such bhikkhus are there in this Sangha of bhikkhus.

14. "In this Sangha of bhikkhus there are bhikkhus who abide
devoted to the development of loving-kindness [82].,. of com-
passion... of appreciative joy... of equanimity... of the meditation
on foulness. ..of the perception of impermanence - such
bhikkhus are there in this Sangha of bhikkhus. In this Sangha of
bhikkhus there are bhikkhus who abide devoted to the develop-
ment of mindfulness of breathing.

(mindfulness of breathing)

15. "Bhikkhus, when mindfulness of breathing is developed and
cultivated, it is of great fruit and great benefit. When mindful-
ness of breathing is developed and cultivated, it fulfils the four
foundations of mindfulness. When the four foundations of
mindfulness are developed and cultivated, they fulfil the seven
enlightenment factors. When the seven enlightenment factors
are developed and cultivated, they fulfil true knowledge and
deliverance.

16. "And how, bhikkhus, is mindfulness of breathing devel-
oped and cultivated, so that it is of great fruit and great benefit?

17. "Here a bhikkhu, gone to the forest or to the root of a tree
or to an empty hut, sits down; having folded his legs crosswise,
set his body erect, and established mindfulness in front of him,
ever mindful he breathes in, mindful he breathes out.

18. "Breathing in long, he understands: 1117 'I breathe' in long';
or breathing out long, he understands: 'I breathe out long.'


944 Anapanasati Sutta: Sutta 118


iii 83


Breathing in short, he understands: 'I breathe in short'; or
breathing out short, he understands: 'I breathe out short.' He
trains thus: 'I shall breathe in experiencing the whole body [of
breath]'; he trains thus: 'I shall breathe out experiencing the
whole body [of breath].' He trains thus: 'I shall breathe in tran-
quillising the bodily formation'; he trains thus: 'I shall breathe
out tranquillising the bodily formation.'

19. "He trains thus: 'I shall breathe in experiencing rapture';
he trains thus: 'I shall breathe out experiencing rapture.' 1118 He
trains thus: 'I shall breathe in experiencing pleasure'; [83] he
trains thus: 'I shall breathe out experiencing pleasure.' He trains
thus: 'I shall breathe in experiencing the mental formation'; he
trains thus: 'I shall breathe out experiencing the mental forma-
tion.' He train thus: 'I shall breathe in tranquillising the mental
formation'; he trains thus: 'I shall breathe out tranquillising the
mental formation.' 1119

20. "He trains thus: 'I shall breathe in experiencing the mind';
he trains thus: 'I shall breathe out experiencing the mind.' He
trains thus: 'I shall breathe in gladdening the mind'; he trains
thus: 'I shall breathe out gladdening the mind.' He trains thus: 'I
shall breathe in concentrating the mind'; he trains thus: 1 shall
breathe out concentrating the mind.' He trains thus: 'I shall
breathe in liberating the mind'; he trains thus: 'I shall breathe
out liberating the mind.' 1120

21. "He trains thus: 'I shall breathe in contemplating imperma-
nence'; he trains thus: 'I shall breathe out contemplating imper-
manence.' He trains thus: 'I shall breathe in contemplating fading
away'; he trains thus: 'I shall breathe out contemplating fading
away.' He trains thus: 'I shall breathe in contemplating cessa-
tion'; he trains thus: 'I shall breathe out contemplating cessation.'
He trains thus: 'I shall breathe in contemplating relinquishment';
he trains thus: 'I shall breathe out contemplating relinquish-
ment.' 1121

22. "Bhikkhus, that is how mindfulness of breathing is devel-
oped and cultivated, so that it is of great fruit and great benefit.

(fulfilment of the four foundations of mindfulness)

23. "And how, bhikkhus, does mindfulness of breathing, devel-
oped and cultivated, fulfil the four foundations of mindfulness?


iii 84


Mindfulness of Breathing 945


24. "Bhikkhus, on whatever occasion a bhikkhu, breathing in
long, understands: 'I breathe in long,' or breathing out long,
understands: 'I breathe out long'; breathing in short, under-
stands: 'I breathe in short/ or breathing out short, understands:
'I breathe out short'; trains thus: 'I shall breathe in experiencing
the whole body [of breath]'; trains thus: 'I shall breathe out
experiencing the whole body [of breath]'; trains thus: 'I shall
breathe in tranquillising the bodily formation'; trains thus: 'I
shall breathe out tranquillising the bodily formation' - on that
occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating the body as a body,
ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness
and grief for the world. I say that this is a certain body among
the bodies, namely, in-breathing and out-breathing. 1122 That is
why on that occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating the body
as a body, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away
covetousness and grief for the world.

25. "Bhikkhus, on whatever occasion [84] a bhikkhu trains
thus: 'I shall breathe in experiencing rapture'; trains thus: 'I shall
breathe out experiencing rapture'; trains thus: 'I shall breathe in
experiencing pleasure'; trains thus: 'I shall breathe out experienc-
ing pleasure'; trains thus: 'I shall breathe in experiencing the men-
tal formation'; trains thus: 'I shall breathe out experiencing the
mental formation'; trains thus: 'I shall breathe in tranquillising the
mental formation'; trains thus: 'I shall breathe out tranquillising
the mental formation' - on that occasion a bhikkhu abides con-
templating feelings as feelings, ardent, fully aware, and mindful,
having put away covetousness and grief for the world. I say that
this is a certain feeling among the feelings, namely, giving close
attention to in-breathing and out-breathing. 1123 That is why on
that occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating feelings as feel-
ings, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away cov-
etousness and grief for the world.

26. "Bhikkhus, on whatever occasion a bhikkhu trains thus: 'I
shall breathe in experiencing the mind'; trains thus: 'I shall
breathe out experiencing the mind'; trains thus: 'I shall breathe
in gladdening the mind'; trains thus: 'I shall breathe out glad-
dening the mind'; train thus: 'I shall breathe in concentrating the
mind'; trains thus: 'I shall breathe out concentrating the mind';
trains thus: 'I shall breathe in liberating the mind'; trains thus: 'I
shall breathe out liberating the mind' - on that occasion a


946 Anapanasati Sutta: Sutta 118 iii 85


bhikkhu abides contemplating mind as mind, ardent, fully
aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief
for the world. I do not say that there is the development of mind-
fulness of breathing for one who is forgetful, who is not fully
aware. That is why on that occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplat-
ing mind as mind, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put
away covetousness and grief for the world. 1124

27. "Bhikkhus, on whatever occasion a bhikkhu trains thus: 'I
shall breathe in contemplating impermanence'; trains thus: 'I shall
breathe out contemplating impermanence'; trains thus: 'I shall
breathe in contemplating fading away'; trains thus: 'I shall
breathe out contemplating fading away'; trains thus: 'I shall
breathe in contemplating cessation'; trains thus: 'I shall breathe
out contemplating cessation'; trains thus: 'I shall breathe in con-
templating relinquishment'; trains thus: 'I shall breathe out con-
templating relinquishment' - on that occasion a bhikkhu abides
contemplating mind-objects as mind-objects, ardent, fully
aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief
for the world. Having seen with wisdom the abandoning of cov-
etousness and grief, [85] he closely looks on with equanimity. 1125
That is why on that occasion a bhikkhu abides contemplating
mind-objects as mind-objects, ardent, fully aware, and mindful,
having put away covetousness and grief for the world.

28. “Bhikkhus, that is how mindfulness of breathing, devel-
oped and cultivated, fulfils the four foundations of mindfulness.

(fulfilment of the seven enlightenment factors)

29. “And how, bhikkhus, do the four foundations of mindfulness,
developed and cultivated, fulfil the seven enlightenment factors?

30. "Bhikkhus, on whatever occasion a bhikkhu abides con-
templating the body as a body, ardent, fully aware, and mind-
ful, having put away covetousness and grief for the world - on
that occasion unremitting mindfulness is established in him. On
whatever occasion unremitting mindfulness is established in a
bhikkhu - on that occasion the mindfulness enlightenment fac-
tor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and by development, it
comes to fulfilment in him.

31. "Abiding thus mindful, he investigates and examines that
state with wisdom and embarks upon a full inquiry into it. On


iii 86


Mindfulness of Breathing 947


whatever occasion, abiding thus mindful, a bhikkhu investigates
and examines that state with wisdom and embarks upon a full
inquiry into it - on that occasion the investigation-of-states
enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and
by development it comes to fulfilment in him.

32. "In one who investigates and examines that state with wis-
dom and embarks upon a full inquiry into it, tireless energy is
aroused. On whatever occasion tireless energy is aroused in a
bhikkhu who investigates and examines that state with wisdom
and embarks upon a full inquiry into it - on that occasion the
energy enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he develops
it, and by development it comes to fulfilment in him.

33. "In one who has aroused energy, unworldly rapture arises.
On whatever occasion unworldly rapture arises in a bhikkhu
who has aroused energy - [86] on that occasion the rapture
enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and
by development it comes to fulfilment in him.

34. "In one who is rapturous, the body and the mind become
tranquil. On whatever occasion the body and the mind become
tranquil in a bhikkhu who is rapturous - on that occasion the
tranquillity enlightenment factor is aroused in him, and he
develops it, and by development it comes to fulfilment in him.

35. "In one whose body is tranquil and who feels pleasure, the
mind becomes concentrated. On whatever occasion the mind
becomes concentrated in a bhikkhu whose body is tranquil and
who feels pleasure - on that occasion the concentration enlight-
enment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and by
development it comes to fulfilment in him.

36. "He closely looks on with equanimity at the mind thus
concentrated. On whatever occasion a bhikkhu closely looks
on with equanimity at the mind thus concentrated - on that
occasion the equanimity enlightenment factor is aroused in
him, and he develops it, and by development it comes to fulfil-
ment in him.

37. "Bhikkhus, on whatever occasion a bhikkhu abides con-
templating feelings as feelings, ardent, fully aware, and mindful,
having put away covetousness and grief for the world ... (repeat
as at §§30-36 )... the equanimity enlightenment factor is aroused
in him, and he develops it, and by development it comes to ful-
filment in him.


948 Anapanasati Sutta: Sutta 118


iii 88


38. “Bhikkhus, on whatever occasion a bhikkhu abides contem-
plating mind as mind, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having
put away covetousness and grief for the world ... (repeat as at
§§30-36 )... the equanimity enlightenment is aroused in him, and
he develops it, and by development it comes to fulfilment in him.

39. “Bhikkhus, on whatever occasion a bhikkhu abides con-
templating mind-object as mind-objects, ardent, fully aware,
and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the
world ...(repeat as at §§30-36)... [87]... the equanimity enlighten-
ment factor is aroused in him, and he develops it, and by
development it comes to fulfilment in him.

40. “Bhikkhus, that is how the four foundations of mindful-
ness, developed and cultivated, fulfil the seven enlightenment
factors. 1126 [88]

(fulfilment of true knowledge and deliverance)

41. "And how, bhikkhus, do the seven enlightenment factors,
developed and cultivated, fulfil true knowledge and deliver-
ance?

42. "Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu develops the mindfulness
enlightenment factor, which is supported by seclusion, dispas-
sion, and cessation, and ripens in relinquishment. 1127 He devel-
ops the investigation-of-states enlightenment factor... the energy
enlightenment factor. ..the rapture enlightenment factor. ..the
tranquillity enlightenment factor... the concentration enlighten-
ment factor... the equanimity enlightenment factor, which is
supported by seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, and ripens in
relinquishment.

43. "Bhikkhus, that is how the seven enlightenment factors,
developed and cultivated, fulfil true knowledge and
deliverance." 1128

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


119 Kayagatasati Sutta
Mindfulness of the Body


1, Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Savatthi in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.

2. Now a number of bhikkhus were sitting in the assembly
hall, where they had met together on returning from their alms-
round, after their meal, when this discussion arose among them:
"It is wonderful, friends, it is marvellous, how it has been said
by the Blessed One who knows and sees, accomplished and
fully enlightened, that mindfulness of the body, when devel-
oped and cultivated, is of great fruit and great benefit."

However, their discussion was interrupted; for the Blessed
One rose from meditation when it was evening, went to the
assembly hall, and sat down on a seat made ready. Then he
addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus, for what discussion
are you sitting together here now? And what was your discus-
sion that was interrupted?" [89]

"Here, venerable sir, we were sitting in the assembly hall, where
we had met together on returning from our almsround, after our
meal, when this discussion arose among us: 'It is wonderful,
friends, it is marvellous, how it has been said by the Blessed One
who knows and sees, accomplished and fully enlightened, that
mindfulness of the body, when developed and cultivated, is of
great fruit and great benefit.' This was our discussion, venerable
sir, that was interrupted when the Blessed One arrived."

3. "And how, bhikkhus, is mindfulness of the body developed
and cultivated so that it is of great fruit and great benefit?

(mindfulness of breathing)

4. "Here a bhikkhu, 1129 gone to the forest or to the root of a tree
or to an empty hut, sits down; having folded his legs crosswise.


949


iii 90


950 Kayagatasati Suita: Suita 119


set his body erect, and established mindfulness in front of him,
ever mindful he breathes in, mindful he breathes out. Breathing
in long, he understands: 'I breathe in long'; or breathing out
long, he understands: 'I breathe out long.' Breathing in short, he
understands: 'I breathe in short'; or breathing out short, he
understands: 'I breathe out short.' He trains thus: 'I shall breathe
in experiencing the whole body [of breath]'; he trains thus: 1
shall breathe out experiencing the whole body [of breath].' He
trains thus: 'I shall breathe in tranquillising the bodily forma-
tion'; he trains thus: 'I shall breathe out tranquillising the bodily
formation.' As he abides thus diligent, ardent, and resolute, his
memories and intentions based on the household life are aban-
doned; with their abandoning his mind becomes steadied inter-
nally, quieted, brought to singleness, and concentrated. That is
how a bhikkhu develops mindfulness of the body.

(THE FOUR POSTURES)

5. "Again, bhikkhus, when walking, a bhikkhu understands: 'I
am walking'; when standing, he understands: 'I am standing';
when sitting, he understands: 'I am sitting'; when lying down,
he understands: 'I am lying down'; or he understands accord-
ingly however his body is disposed. As he abides thus diligent,
ardent, and resolute, his memories and intentions based on the
household life are abandoned... That too is how a bhikkhu
develops mindfulness of' the body. [90]

(full awareness)

6. "Again, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu is one who acts in full awareness
when going forward and returning; who acts in full awareness
when looking ahead and looking away; who acts in full aware-
ness when flexing and extending his limbs; who acts in full
awareness when wearing his robes and carrying his outer robe
and bowl; who acts in full awareness when eating, drinking,
consuming food, and tasting; who acts in full awareness when
defecating or urinating; who acts in full awareness when walk-
ing, standing, sitting, falling asleep, waking up, talking, and
keeping silent. As he abides thus diligent, ardent, and resolute,
his memories and intentions based on the household life are


iii 91


Mindfulness of the Body 951


abandoned... That too is how a bhikkhu develops mindfulness
of the body.

(FOULNESS - THE BODILY PARTS)

7. "Again, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu reviews this same body up from
the soles of the feet and down from the top of the hair, bounded
by skin, as full of many kinds of impurity thus: 'In this body
there are head-hairs, body-hairs, nails, teeth, skin, flesh, sinews,
bones, bone-marrow, kidneys, heart, liver, diaphragm, spleen,
lungs, large intestines, small intestines, contents of the stomach,
feces, bile, phlegm, pus, blood, sweat, fat, tears, grease, spittle,
snot, oil of the joints, and urine.' Just as though there were a bag
with an opening at both ends full of many sorts of grain, such as
hill rice, red rice, beans, peas, millet, and white rice, and a man
with good eyes were to open it and review it thus: 'This is hill
rice, this is red rice, these are beans, these are peas, this is millet,
this is white rice'; so too, a bhikkhu reviews this same body as
full of many kinds of impurity thus: 'In this body there are
head-hairs... and urine.' As he abides thus diligent, ardent, and
resolute, his memories and intentions based on the household
life are abandoned... That too is how a bhikkhu develops mind-
fulness of the body. [91]

(elements)

8. "Again, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu reviews this same body, however
it is placed, however disposed, as consisting of elements thus: 'In
this body there are the earth element, the water element, the fire
element, and the air element.' Just as though a skilled butcher or
his apprentice had killed a cow and were seated at the crossroads
with it cut up into pieces; so too, a bhikkhu reviews this same
body however it is placed, however disposed, as consisting of
elements thus: 'In this body there are the earth element, the
water element, the fire element, and the air element.' As he
abides thus diligent, ardent, and resolute, his memories and
intentions connected with the household life are abandoned...
That too is how a bhikkhu develops mindfulness of the body.


952 Kayagatasati Sutta: Sutta 119


iii 92


(THE NINE CHARNEL GROUND CONTEMPLATIONS)

9. "Again, bhikkhus, as though he were to see a corpse thrown
aside in a charnel ground, one, two, or three days dead, bloated,
livid, and oozing matter, a bhikkhu compares this same body
with it thus: 'This body too is of the same nature, it will be like
that, it is not exempt from that fate/ As he abides thus diligent. . .
That too is how a bhikkhu develops mindfulness of the body.

10. "Again, as though he were to see a corpse thrown aside in
a charnel ground, being devoured by crows, hawks, vultures,
dogs, jackals, or various kinds of worms, a bhikkhu compares
this same body with it thus: 'This body too is of the same nature,
it will be like that, it is not exempt from that fate.' As he abides
thus diligent... That too is how a bhikkhu develops mindfulness
of the body. [92]

11-14. "Again, as though he were to see a corpse thrown aside
in a charnel ground, a skeleton with flesh and blood, held
together with sinews... a fleshless skeleton smeared with blood,
held together with sinews... a skeleton without flesh and blood,
held together with sinews... disconnected bones scattered in all
directions - here a hand-bone, there a foot-bone, here a shin-
bone, there a thigh-bone, here a hip-bone, there a back-bone,
here a rib-bone, there a breast-bone, here an arm-bone, there a
shoulder-bone, here a neck-bone, there a jaw-bone, here a tooth,
there the skull - a bhikkhu compares this same body with it
thus: 'This body too is of the same nature, it will be like that, it is
not exempt from that fate.' As he abides thus diligent. . .That too
is how a bhikkhu develops mindfulness of the body.

15-17. "Again, as though he were to see a corpse thrown aside
in a charnel ground, bones bleached white, the colour of
shells... bones heaped up, more than a year old... bones rotted
and crumbled to dust, a bhikkhu compares this same body with
it thus: 'This body too is of the same nature, it will be like that, it
is not exempt from that fate.' As he abides thus diligent. . .That
too is how a bhikkhu develops mindfulness of the body.

(the jhAnas)

18. "Again, bhikkhus, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and


Hi 93


Mindfulness of the Body 953


abides in the first jhana, which is accompanied by applied and
sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure bom of seclusion.
He makes the rapture and pleasure born of seclusion drench,
steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his
whole body unpervaded by the rapture and pleasure born of
seclusion. Just as a skilled bath man or a bath man's appren-
tice 1130 heaps bath powder in a metal basin and, sprinkling it
gradually with water, kneads it till the moisture wets his ball of
bath powder, soaks it and pervades it inside and out, yet the ball
itself does not ooze; so too, a bhikkhu makes the rapture and
pleasure bom of seclusion [93] drench, steep, fill, and pervade
this body, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded
by the rapture and pleasure born of seclusion. As he abides thus
diligent... That too is how a bhikkhu develops mindfulness of
the body.

19. "Again, bhikkhus, with the stilling of applied and sus-
tained thought, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second
jhana, which has self-confidence and singleness of mind without
applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born
of concentration. He makes the rapture and pleasure born of
concentration drench, steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that
there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by the rapture
and pleasure born of concentration. Just as though there were a
lake whose waters welled up from below and it had no inflow
from east, west, north, or south, and would not be replenished
from time to time by showers of rain, then the cool fount of
water welling up in the lake would make the cool water drench,
steep, fill, and pervade the lake, so that there would be no part
of the whole lake unpervaded by cool water; so too, a bhikkhu
makes the rapture and pleasure born of concentration drench,
steep, fill, and pervade this body, so that there is no part of his
whole body unpervaded by the rapture and pleasure born of
concentration. As he abides thus diligent... That too is how a
bhikkhu develops mindfulness of the body.

20. "Again, bhikkhus, with the fading away as well of rapture,
a bhikkhu abides in equanimity, and mindful and fully aware,
still feeling pleasure with the body, he enters upon and abides in
the third jhana, on account of which noble ones announce: 'He
has a pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.' He
makes the pleasure divested of rapture drench, steep, fill, and



954 Kayagatasati Sutta: Sutta 119


iii 94


pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body
unpervaded by the pleasure divested of rapture. Just as in a
pond of blue or white or red lotuses, some lotuses that are bom
and grow in the water thrive immersed in the water without ris-
ing out of it, [94] and cool water drenches, steeps, fills, and per-
vades them to their tips and their roots, so that there is no part
of all those lotuses unpervaded by cool water; so too, a bhikkhu
makes the pleasure divested of rapture drench, steep, fill, and
pervade this body, so that there is no part of his whole body
unpervaded by the pleasure divested of rapture. As he abides
thus diligent... That too is how a bhikkhu develops mindfulness
of the body.

21. "Again, bhikkhus, with the abandoning of pleasure and
pain, and with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, a
bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the fourth jhana, which has
neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to
equanimity. He sits pervading this body with a pure bright
mind, so that there is no part of his whole body unpervaded by
the pure bright mind. Just as though a man were sitting covered
from head down with a white cloth, so that there would be no
part of his whole body not covered by the white cloth; so too, a
bhikkhu sits pervading this body with a pure bright mind, so
that there is no part of his body unpervaded by the pure bright
mind. As he abides thus diligent, ardent, and resolute, his mem-
ories and intentions based on the household life are abandoned;
with their abandoning his mind becomes steadied internally,
quieted, brought to singleness, and concentrated. That too is
how a bhikkhu develops mindfulness of the body.

(progress through mindfulness of the body)

22. "Bhikkhus, anyone who has developed and cultivated mind-
fulness of the body has included within himself whatever
wholesome states there are that partake of true knowledge. 1131
Just as anyone who has extended his mind over the great ocean
has included within it whatever streams there are that flow into
the ocean; so too, anyone who has developed and cultivated
mindfulness of the body has included within himself whatever
wholesome states there are that partake of true knowledge.


iii 96


Mindfulness of the Body 955


23. "Bhikkhus, when anyone has not developed and cultivated
mindfulness of the body, Mara finds an opportunity and a sup-
port in him. Suppose a man were to throw a heavy stone ball
upon a mound of wet clay. What do you think, bhikkhus?
Would that heavy ball find entry into that mound of wet clay?"
- "Yes, venerable sir." - [95] "So too, bhikkhus, when anyone
has not developed and cultivated mindfulness of the body,
Mara finds an opportunity and a support in him.

24. "Suppose there were a dry sapless piece of wood, and a
man came with an upper fire-stick, thinking: 'I shall light a fire, I
shall produce heat.' What do you think, bhikkhus? Could the
man light a fire and produce heat by rubbing the dry sapless
piece of wood with an upper fire-stick?" - "Yes, venerable sir." -
"So too, bhikkhus, when anyone has not developed and culti-
vated mindfulness of the body, Mara finds an opportunity and a
support in him.

25. "Suppose there were a hollow empty water jug set out on a
stand, and a man came with a supply of water. What do you
think, bhikkhus? Could the man pour the water into the jug?" -
"Yes, venerable sir." - "So too, bhikkhus, when anyone has not
developed and cultivated mindfulness of the body, Mara finds
an opportunity and a support in him.

26. "Bhikkhus, when anyone has developed and cultivated
mindfulness of the body, Mara cannot find an opportunity or a
support in him. Suppose a man were to throw a light ball of
string at a door-panel made entirely of heartwood. What do you
think, bhikkhus? Would that light ball of string find entry
through that door-panel made entirely of heartwood?" - "No,
venerable sir." - "So too, bhikkhus, when anyone has developed
and cultivated mindfulness of the body, Mara cannot find an
opportunity or a support in him.

27. "Suppose there were a wet sappy piece of wood, and a
man came with an upper fire-stick, thinking: 'I shall light a fire, I
shall produce heat.' [96] What do you think, bhikkhus? Could
the man light a fire and produce heat by taking the upper fire-
stick and rubbing it against the wet sappy piece of wood?" -
"No, venerable sir." - "So too, bhikkhus, when anyone has
developed and cultivated mindfulness of the body, Mara cannot
find an opportunity or a support in him.



956 Kayagatasati Sutta: Sutta 119


iii 97


28. "Suppose, set out on a stand, there were a water jug full of
water right up to the brim so that crows could drink from it, and
a man came with a supply of water. What do you think,
bhikkhus? Could the man pour the water into the jug?" - "No,
venerable sir." - "So too, bhikkhus, when anyone has developed
and cultivated mindfulness of the body, Mara cannot find an
opportunity or a support in him.

29. "Bhikkhus, when anyone has developed and cultivated
mindfulness of the body, then when he inclines his mind
towards realising any state that may be realised by direct
knowledge, he attains the ability to witness any aspect therein,
there being a suitable basis. Suppose, set out on a stand, there
were a water jug full of water right up to the brim so that crows
could drink from it. Whenever a strong man tips it, would water
come out?" - "Yes, venerable sir." - "So too, bhikkhus, when
anyone has developed and cultivated mindfulness of the body,
then when he inclines his mind towards realising any state that
may be realised by direct knowledge, he attains the ability to
witness any aspect therein, there being a suitable basis.

30. "Suppose there were a square pond on level ground, sur-
rounded by an embankment, full of water right up to the brim
so that crows could drink from it. Whenever a strong man
loosens the embankment, would water come out?" - [97] "Yes,
venerable sir." - "So too, bhikkhus, when anyone has developed
and cultivated mindfulness of the body. . .he attains the ability to
witness any aspect therein, there being a suitable basis.

31. "Suppose there were a chariot on even ground at the cross-
roads, harnessed to thoroughbreds, waiting with goad lying
ready, so that a skilled trainer, a charioteer of horses to be tamed,
might mount it, and taking the reins in his left hand and the goad
in his right hand, might drive out and back by any road when-
ever he likes. So too, bhikkhus, when anyone has developed and
cultivated mindfulness of the body. . .he attains the ability to wit-
ness any aspect therein, there being a suitable basis.

(benefits of mindfulness of the body)

32. "Bhikkhus, when mindfulness of the body has been repeat-
edly practised, developed, cultivated, used as a vehicle, used as


iii 99


Mindfulness of the Body 957


a basis, established, consolidated, and well undertaken, these
ten benefits may be expected. What ten?

33. (i) "One becomes a conqueror of discontent and delight,
and discontent does not conquer oneself; one abides overcoming
discontent whenever it arises.

34. (ii) "One becomes a conqueror of fear and dread, and fear
and dread do not conquer oneself; one abides overcoming fear
and dread whenever they arise.

35. (iii) "One bears cold and heat, hunger and thirst, and con-
tact with gadflies, mosquitoes, wind, the sun, and creeping
things; one endures ill-spoken, unwelcome words and arisen
bodily feelings that are painful, racking, sharp, piercing, dis-
agreeable, distressing, and menacing to life.

36. (iv) "One obtains at will, without trouble or difficulty, the
four jhanas that constitute the higher mind and [98] provide a
pleasant abiding here and now.

37. (v) "One wields the various kinds of supernormal power...
(as Sutta 108, §18 )... one wields bodily mastery even as far as the
Brahma-world.

38. (vi) "With the divine ear element, which is purified and
surpasses the human, one hears both kinds of sounds, the divine
and the human, those that are far as well as near.

39. (vii) "One understands the minds of other beings, of other
persons, having encompassed them with one's own mind. One
understands a mind affected by lust as affected by lust... (as
Sutta 108, §20 )... an unliberated mind as unliberated.

40. (viii) "One recollects one's manifold past lives, that is, [99]
one birth, two births. ..(as Sutta 51, §24 ). ..Thus with their aspects
and particulars one recollects one's manifold past lives.

41. (ix) "With the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses
the human, one sees beings passing away and reappearing, infe j
rior and superior, fair and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate, and
one understands how beings pass on according to their actions.

42. (x) "By realising for oneself with direct knowledge, one
here and now enters upon and abides in the deliverance of mind
and deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruc-
tion of the taints.

43. "Bhikkhus, when mindfulness of the body has been repeat-
edly practised, developed, cultivated, used as a vehicle, used as


958 Kayagatasati Sutta: Sutta 119


Hi 99


a basis, established, consolidated, and well undertaken, these
ten benefits may be expected."

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


120 Sankharupapatti Sutta
Reappearance by Aspiration


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There he
addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, I shall teach you reappearance in accordance
with one's aspiration. 1132 Listen and attend closely to what I
shall say." - "Yes, venerable sir," the bhikkhus replied. The
Blessed One said this:

3. "Here, bhikkhus, a bhikkhu possesses faith, virtue, learning,
generosity, and wisdom. He thinks: 'Oh, that on the dissolution of
the body, after death, I might reappear in the company of well-to-
do nobles!' He fixes his mind on that, establishes it, develops it.
[100] These aspirations and this abiding of his, thus developed
and cultivated, lead to his reappearance there. This, bhikkhus, is
the path, the way that leads to reappearance there. 1133

4-5. "Again, a bhikkhu possesses faith... and wisdom. He
thinks: 'Oh, that on the dissolution of the body, after death, I
might reappear in the company of well-to-do brahmins!... in the
company of well-to-do householders!' He fixes his mind on
that... This, bhikkhus, is the path, the way that leads to reap-
pearance there.

6. "Again, a bhikkhu possesses faith... and wisdom. He hears
that the gods of the heaven of the Four Great Kings are long-
lived, beautiful, and enjoy great happiness. He thinks: 'Oh, that
on the dissolution of the body, after death, I might reappear in
the company of the gods of the heaven of the Four Great Kings!'
He fixes his mind on that... This, bhikkhus, is the path, the way
that leads to reappearance there.

7-11. "Again, a bhikkhu possesses faith... and wisdom. He
hears that the gods of the heaven of the Thirty-three...the Yama


959


iii 102


960 Sankharupapatti Sutta: Sutta 120


gods... the gods of the Tusita heaven... the gods who delight in
creating... the gods who wield power over others' creations are
long-lived, beautiful, and enjoy great happiness. He thinks: 'Oh,
that on the dissolution of the body, after death, I might reappear
in the company of the gods who wield power over others' crea-
tions!' He fixes his mind on that... This, bhikkhus, is the path,
the way that leads to reappearance there.

12. "Again, a bhikkhu possesses faith [101]... and wisdom. He
hears that the Brahma of a Thousand is long-lived, beautiful,
and enjoys great happiness. Now the Brahma of a Thousand
abides intent on pervading a world-system of a thousand
worlds, and he abides intent on pervading the beings that have
reappeared there. 1134 Just as a man with good sight might take a
gallnut in his hand and review it, so the Brahma of a Thousand
abides intent on pervading a world-system of a thousand
[worlds], and he abides intent on pervading the beings that have
reappeared there. The bhikkhu thinks: 'Oh, that on the dissolu-
tion of the body, after death, I might reappear in the company of
the Brahma of a Thousand!' He fixes his mind on that... This,
bhikkhus, is the path, the way that leads to reappearance there.

13-16. "Again, a bhikkhu possesses faith... and wisdom. He
hears that the Brahma of Two Thousand... the Brahma of Three
Thousand... the Brahma of Four Thousand... the Brahma of Five
Thousand is long-lived, beautiful, and enjoys great happiness.
Now the Brahma of Five Thousand abides intent on pervading a
world-system of five thousand worlds, and he abides intent on
pervading the beings that have reappeared there. Just as a man
with good sight might take five gallnuts in his hand and review
them, so the Brahma of Five Thousand abides intent on pervad-
ing a world-system of five thousand worlds, and he abides
intent on pervading the beings that have reappeared there. The
bhikkhu thinks: 'Oh, that on the dissolution of the body, after
death, I might reappear in the company of the Brahma of Five
Thousand!' He fixes his mind on that. ..This, bhikkhus, is the
path, the way that leads to reappearance there.

17. "Again, a bhikkhu possesses faith... and wisdom. He hears
that the Brahma of Ten Thousand is long-lived, beautiful, and
enjoys great happiness. Now the Brahma of Ten Thousand
abides intent on pervading [102] a world-system of ten thousand


iii 103


Reappearance by Aspiration 961


worlds, and he abides intent on pervading the beings that have
reappeared there. Just as a fine beryl gem of purest water, eight-
faceted, well cut, lying on red brocade, glows, radiates, and
shines, so the Brahma of Ten Thousand abides intent on pervad-
ing a world-system of ten thousand worlds, and he abides intent
on pervading the beings that have reappeared there. The
bhikkhu thinks: 'Oh, that on the dissolution of the body, after
death, I might reappear in the company of the Brahma of Ten
Thousand!' He fixes his mind on that... This, bhikkhus, is the
path, the way that leads to reappearance there.

18. "Again, a bhikkhu possesses faith... and wisdom. He hears
that the Brahma of a Hundred Thousand is long-lived, beautiful,
and enjoys great happiness. Now the Brahma of a Hundred
Thousand abides intent on pervading a world-system of a hun-
dred thousand worlds, and he abides intent on pervading the
beings that have reappeared there. Just as an ornament of finest
gold, very skilfully wrought in the furnace by a clever gold-
smith, lying on red brocade, glows, radiates, and shines, so the
Brahma of a Hundred Thousand abides intent on pervading a
world-system of a hundred thousand worlds, and he abides
intent on pervading the beings that have reappeared there. The
bhikkhu thinks: 'Oh, that on the dissolution of the body, after
death, I might reappear in the company of the Brahma of a
Hundred Thousand!' He fixes his mind on that. . .This, bhikkhus,
is the path, the way that leads to reappearance there.

19-32. "Again, a bhikkhu possesses faith... and wisdom. He
hears that the gods of Radiance 1135 . ..the gods of Limited
Radiance... the gods of Immeasurable Radiance... the gods of
Streaming Radiance... the gods of Glory... the gods of Limited
Glory... the gods of Immeasurable Glory... the gods of Refulgent
Glory... [103]... the gods of Great Fruit... the Aviha gods... the
Atappa gods. ..the Sudassa gods. ..the Sudassi gods. ..the
Akanittha gods are long-lived, beautiful, and enjoy great happi-
ness. He thinks: 'Oh, that on the dissolution of the body, after
death, I might reappear in the company of the Akanittha gods!'
He fixes his mind on that... This, bhikkhus, is the path, the way
that leads to reappearance there.

33-36. "Again, a bhikkhu possesses faith... and wisdom. He
hears that the gods of the base of infinite space... the gods of the



iii 103


962 Sankharupapatti Sutta: Sutta 120


base of infinite consciousness... the gods of the base of nothing-
ness... the gods of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-percep-
tion are long-lived, long-enduring, and enjoy great happiness. He
thinks: 'Oh, that on the dissolution of the body, after death, I
might reappear in the company of the gods of the base of nei-
ther-perception-nor-non-perception!' He fixes his mind on that,
establishes it, develops it. These aspirations and this abiding of
his, thus developed and cultivated, lead to his reappearance
there. This, bhikkhus, is the path, the way that leads to reap-
pearance there.

37. "Again, a bhikkhu possesses faith, virtue, learning, gen-
erosity, and wisdom. He thinks: 'Oh, that by realising for myself
with direct knowledge, I might here and now enter upon and
abide in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by wisdom
that are taintless with the destruction of the taints!' And by real-
ising for himself with direct knowledge, he here and now enters
upon and abides in the deliverance of mind and deliverance by
wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the taints.
Bhikkhus, this bhikkhu does not reappear anywhere at all." 1136

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


3

The Division on Voidness

(Sunnatavagga)




121 Culasunnata Sutta
The Shorter Discourse on Voidness


[104] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One
was living at Savatthl in the Eastern Park, in the Palace of
Migara's Mother.

2. Then, when it was evening, the venerable Ananda rose from
meditation, went to the Blessed One, and after paying homage
to him, he sat down at one side and said to the Blessed One:

3. "Venerable sir, on one occasion the Blessed One was living
in the Sakyan country at a town of the Sakyans named
Nagaraka. There, venerable sir, I heard and learned this from
the Blessed One's own lips: 'Now, Ananda, I often abide in
voidness.' 1137 Did I hear that correctly, venerable sir, did I learn
that correctly, attend to that correctly, remember that correctly?"

"Certainly, Ananda, you heard that correctly, learned that cor-
rectly, attended to that correctly, remembered that correctly. As
formerly, Ananda, so now too I often abide in voidness.

4. "Ananda, just as this Palace of Migara's Mother is void of
elephants, cattle, horses, and mares, void of gold and silver,
void of the assembly of men and women, and there is present
only this non-voidness, namely, the singleness dependent on the
Sangha of bhikkhus; so too, a bhikkhu - not attending to the
perception of village, not attending to the perception of people -
attends to the singleness dependent on the perception of for-
est. 1138 His mind enters into that perception of forest and
acquires confidence, steadiness, and decision. He understands
thus: 'Whatever disturbances there might be dependent on the
perception of village, those are not present here; whatever dis-
turbances there might be dependent on the perception of peo-
ple, those are not present here. There is present only this amount
of disturbance, namely, the singleness dependent on the percep-
tion of forest.' 1139 He understands: 'This field of perception is


965


966 Culasunnata Sutta: Sutta 121


iii 106


void of the perception of village; this field of perception is void of
the perception of people. There is present only this non- voidness,
namely, the singleness dependent on the perception of forest/
Thus he regards it as void of what is not there, but as to what
[105] remains there he understands that which is present thus:
"This is present/ Thus, Ananda, this is his genuine, undistorted,
pure descent into voidness.

5. "Again, Ananda, a bhikkhu - not attending to the percep-
tion of people, not attending to the perception of forest - attends
to the singleness dependent on the perception of earth. 2240 His
mind enters into that perception of earth and acquires confi-
dence, steadiness, and decision. Just as a bull's hide becomes
free from folds when fully stretched with a hundred pegs; so
too, a bhikkhu - not attending to any of the ridges and hollows
of this earth, to the rivers and ravines, the tracts of stumps and
thorns, the mountains and uneven places - attends to the single-
ness dependent on the perception of earth. His mind enters into
that perception of earth and acquires confidence, steadiness, and
decision. He understands thus: 'Whatever disturbances there
might be dependent on the perception of people, those are not
present here; whatever disturbances there might be dependent
on the perception of forest, those are not present here. There is
present only this amount of disturbance, namely, the singleness
dependent on the perception of earth/ He understands: This
field of perception is void of the perception of- people; this field
of perception is void of the perception of forest. There is present
only this non-voidness, namely, the singleness dependent on the
perception of earth.' Thus he regards it as void of what is not
there, but as to what remains there he understands that which is
present thus: 'This is present.' Thus, Ananda, this too is his gen-
uine, undistorted, pure descent into voidness.

6. "Again, Ananda, a bhikkhu - not attending to the percep-
tion of forest, not attending to the perception of earth - attends
to the singleness dependent on the perception of the base of infi-
nite space. 1141 His mind enters into that perception of the base of
infinite space and acquires confidence, steadiness, and decision.
He understands thus: 'Whatever disturbances there might be
dependent on the perception of forest, those are not present
here; whatever disturbances there might be [106] dependent on
the perception of earth, those are not present here. There is


iii 106


The Shorter Discourse on Voidness 967


present only this amount of disturbance, namely, the singleness
dependent on the perception of the base of infinite space.' He
understands: 'This field of perception is void of the perception
of forest; this field of perception is void of the perception of
earth. There is present only this non-voidness, namely, the sin-
gleness dependent on the perception of the base of infinite
space.' Thus he regards it as void of what is not there, but as to
what remains there he understands that which is present thus:
'This is present.' Thus, Ananda, this too is his genuine, undis-
torted, pure descent into voidness.

7. "Again, Ananda, a bhikkhu - not attending to the perception
of earth, not attending to the perception of the base of infinite
space - attends to the singleness dependent on the perception of
the base of infinite consciousness. His mind enters into that per-
ception of the base of infinite consciousness and acquires confi-
dence, steadiness, and decision. He understands thus: 'Whatever
disturbances there might be dependent on the perception of
earth, those are not present here; whatever disturbances there
might be dependent on the perception of the base of infinite
space, those are not present here. There is present only this
amount of disturbance, namely, the singleness dependent on the
perception of the base of infinite consciousness.' He under-
stands: 'This field of perception is void of the perception of
earth; this field of perception is void of the perception of the
base of infinite space. There is present only this non-voidness,
namely, the singleness dependent on the perception of the base
of infinite consciousness.' Thus he regards it as void of what is
not there, but as to what remains there he understands that
which is present thus: 'This is present.' Thus, Ananda, this too is
his genuine, undistorted, pure descent into voidness.

8. "Again, Ananda, a bhikkhu - not attending to the percep :
tion of the base of infinite space, not attending to the perception
of the base of infinite consciousness - attends to the singleness
dependent on the perception of the base of nothingness. His
mind enters into that perception of the base of nothingness and
acquires confidence, steadiness, and decision. He understands
thus: 'Whatever disturbances there might be dependent on the
perception of the base of infinite space, those are not present
here; whatever disturbances there might be dependent on the
perception of the base of infinite consciousness, those are not


iii 107


968 Culasunnata Sutta: Sutta 121


present here. There is present only this amount of disturbance,
namely, the singleness dependent on the perception of the base
of nothingness.' He understands: 'This field of perception is
void of the perception of the base of infinite space; [107] this
field of perception is void of the perception of the base of infi-
nite consciousness. There is present only this non-voidness,
namely, the singleness dependent on the perception of the base
of nothingness.' Thus he regards it as void of what is not there,
but as to what remains there he understands that which is pre-
sent thus: 'This is present.' Thus, Ananda, this too is his genuine,
undistorted, pure descent into voidness.

9. "Again, Ananda, a bhikkhu - not attending to the percep-
tion of the base of infinite consciousness, not attending to the
perception of the base of nothingness - attends to the singleness
dependent on the perception of the base of neither-perception-
nor-non-perception. His mind enters into that perception of the
base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception and acquires
confidence, steadiness, and decision. He understands thus:
'Whatever disturbances there might be dependent on the per-
ception of the base of infinite consciousness, those are not pre-
sent here; whatever disturbances there might be dependent on
the perception of the base of nothingness, those are not present
here. There is present only this amount of disturbance, namely,
the singleness dependent on the perception of the base of neither-
perception-nor-non-perception.' He understands: 'This field of
perception is void of the perception of the base of infinite con-
sciousness; this field of perception is void of the perception of the
base of nothingness. There is present only this non-voidness,
namely, the singleness dependent on the perception of the base of
neither-perception-nor-non-perception.' Thus he regards it as
void of what is not there, but as to what remains there he under-
stands that which is present thus: 'This is present.' Thus, Ananda,
this too is his genuine, undistorted, pure descent into voidness.

10. "Again, Ananda, a bhikkhu - not attending to the percep-
tion of the base of nothingness, not attending to the perception
of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception - attends
to the singleness dependent on the signless concentration of
mind. 1142 His mind enters into that signless concentration of
mind and acquires confidence, steadiness, and decision. He
understand thus: 'Whatever disturbances there might be


iii 108


The Shorter Discourse on Voidness 969


dependent on the perception of the base of nothingness, those
are not present here; whatever disturbances there might be
dependent on the perception of the base of neither -perception-
nor-non-perception, those are not present here. There is present
only this amount of disturbance, namely, that connected with
the six bases that are dependent on this body and [108] condi-
tioned by life.' He understands: 'This field of perception is void of
the perception of the base of nothingness; this field of perception
is void of the perception of the base of neither-perception-nor-
non-perception. There is present only this non-voidness, name-
ly, that connected with the six bases that are dependent on this
body and conditioned by life.' Thus he regards it as void of
what is not there, but as to what remains there he understands
that which is present thus: 'This is present.' Thus, Ananda, this
too is his genuine, undistorted, pure descent into voidness.

11. "Again, Ananda, a bhikkhu - not attending to the percep-
tion of the base of nothingness, not attending to the perception
of the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception - attends
to the singleness dependent on the signless concentration of
mind. His mind enters into that signless concentration of mind
and acquires confidence, steadiness, and decision. He under-
stands thus: 'This signless concentration of mind is conditioned
and volitionally produced. But whatever is conditioned and
volitionally produced is impermanent, subject to cessation.' 1143
When he knows and sees thus, his mind is liberated from the
taint of sensual desire, from the taint of being, and from the taint
of ignorance. When it is liberated there comes the knowledge: 'It
is liberated.' He understands: 'Birth is destroyed, the holy life
has been lived, what had to be done has been done, there is no
more coming to any state of being.'

12. "He understands thus: 'Whatever disturbances there might
be dependent on the taint of sensual desire, those are not pre-
sent here; whatever disturbances there might be dependent on
the taint of being, those are not present here; whatever distur-
bances there might be dependent on the taint of ignorance,
those are not present here. There is present only this amount of
disturbance, namely, that connected with the six bases that are
dependent on this body and conditioned by life.' He under-
stands: 'This field of perception is void of the taint of sensual
desire; this field of perception is void of the taint of being; this



970 Culasunnata Sutta: Sutta 121 iii 109


field of perception is void of the taint of ignorance. There is pre-
sent only this non-voidness, namely, that connected with the six
bases that are dependent on this body and conditioned by life.'
Thus he regards it as void of what is not there, but as to what
remains there he understands that which is present thus: 'This is
present.' Thus, Ananda, this is his genuine, [109] undistorted,
pure descent into voidness, supreme and unsurpassed. 1144

13. "Ananda, whatever recluses and brahmins in the past
entered upon and abided in pure, supreme, unsurpassed void-
ness, all entered upon and abided in this same pure, supreme,
unsurpassed voidness. Whatever recluses and brahmins in the
future will enter upon and abide in pure, supreme, unsurpassed
voidness, all will enter upon and abide in this same pure,
supreme, unsurpassed voidness. Whatever recluses and brah-
mins in the present enter upon and abide in pure, supreme,
unsurpassed voidness, all enter upon and abide in this same
pure, supreme, unsurpassed voidness. Therefore, Ananda, you
should train thus: 'We will enter upon and abide in pure,
supreme, unsurpassed voidness/"

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Ananda was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


122 Mahasunnata Sutta
The Greater Discourse on Voidness


1. Thus have I heard . 1145 On one occasion the Blessed One was
living in the Sakyan country at Kapilavatthu in Nigrodha's Park.

2. Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One dressed, and
taking his bowl and outer robe, went into Kapilavatthu for alms.
When he had wandered for alms in Kapilavatthu and had
returned from his almsround, after his meal he went for his day-
time abiding to the dwelling of Kalakhemaka the Sakyan. Now
on that occasion there were many resting places prepared in
Kalakhemaka the Sakyan's dwelling. 1146 When the Blessed One
saw this, [110] he thought: "There are many resting places pre-
pared in Kalakhemaka the Sakyan's dwelling. Do many
bhikkhus live there?"

Now on that occasion the venerable Ananda, along with many
bhikkhus, was busy making robes at Ghata the Sakyan's
dwelling. Then, when it was evening, the Blessed One rose from
retreat and went to Ghata the Sakyan's dwelling. There he sat
down on a seat made ready and asked the venerable Ananda:

"Ananda, there are many resting places prepared in Kalakhe-
maka the Sakyan's dwelling. Do many bhikkhus live there?" 1147

"Venerable sir, many resting places have been prepared in
Kalakhemaka the Sakyan's dwelling. Many bhikkhus are livifig
there. This is our time for making robes, venerable sir." 1148

3. "Ananda, a bhikkhu does not shine by delighting in com-
pany, by taking delight in company, by devoting himself to
delight in company; by delighting in society, by taking delight
in society, by rejoicing in society. Indeed, Ananda, it is not pos-
sible that a bhikkhu who delights in company, takes delight in
company, and devotes himself to delight in company, who
delights in society, takes delight in society, and rejoices in soci-
ety, will ever obtain at will, without trouble or difficulty, the


971


972 MaMsunnata Sutta: Sutta 122


iii 111


bliss of renunciation, the bliss of seclusion, the bliss of peace, the
bliss of enlightenment. 1149 But it can be expected that when a
bhikkhu lives alone, withdrawn from society, he will obtain at
will, without trouble or difficulty, the bliss of renunciation, the
bliss of seclusion, the bliss of peace, the bliss of enlightenment.

4. "Indeed, Ananda, it is not possible that a bhikkhu who
delights in company, takes delight in company, and devotes
himself to delight in company, who delights in society, takes
delight in society, and rejoices in society, will ever enter upon
and abide in either the deliverance of mind that is temporary
and delectable or in [the deliverance of mind] that is perpetual
and unshakeable. 1JS0 But it can be expected that when a bhikkhu
lives alone, withdrawn from society, he will enter upon and
abide in the deliverance of mind that is temporary and delec-
table or in [the deliverance of mind] that is perpetual and
unshakeable. [Ill]

5. "I do not see even a single kind of form, Ananda, from the
change and alteration of which there would not arise sorrow,
lamentation, pain, grief, and despair in one who lusts for it and
takes delight in it.

6. "However, Ananda, there is this abiding discovered by the
Tathagata: to enter and abide in voidness internally by giving
no attention to all signs. 1151 If, while the Tathagata is abiding
thus, he is visited by bhikkhus or bhikkhunis, by men or
women lay followers, by kings or kings' ministers, by other sec-
tarians or their disciples, then with a mind leaning to seclusion,
tending and inclining to seclusion, withdrawn, delighting in
renunciation, and altogether done with things that are the basis
for taints, he invariably talks to them in a way concerned with
dismissing them.

7. "Therefore, Ananda, if a bhikkhu should wish: 'May I enter
upon and abide in voidness internally/ he should steady his
mind internally, quiet it, bring it to singleness, and concentrate
it. And how does he steady his mind internally, quiet it, bring it
to singleness, and concentrate it?

8. "Here, Ananda, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and
abides in the first jhana . . . the second jhana . . . the third jhana . . . the
fourth jhana, which has neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of
mindfulness due to equanimity. That is how a bhikkhu steadies


iii 113


The Greater Discourse on Voidness 973


his mind internally, quiets it, brings it to singleness, and concen-
trates it. [112]

9. "Then he gives attention to voidness internally. 1152 While he
is giving attention to voidness internally, his mind does not
enter into voidness internally or acquire confidence, steadiness,
and decision. When that is so, he understands thus: 'While I am
giving attention to voidness internally, my mind does not enter
into voidness internally or acquire confidence, steadiness, and
decision.' In this way he has full awareness of that.

"He gives attention to voidness externally... He gives attention
to voidness internally and externally... He gives attention to
imperturbability. 1153 While he is giving attention to imperturba-
bility, his mind does not enter into imperturbability or acquire
confidence, steadiness, and decision. When that is so, he under-
stands thus: 'While I am giving attention to imperturbability, my
mind does not enter into imperturbability or acquire confidence,
steadiness, and decision.' In this way he has full awareness of
that.

10. "Then that bhikkhu should steady his mind internally,
quiet it, bring it to singleness, and concentrate it on that same
sign of concentration as before. 1154 Then he gives attention to
voidness internally. While he is giving attention to voidness
internally, his mind enters into voidness internally and acquires
confidence, steadiness, and decision. When that is so, he under-
stands thus: 'While I am giving attention to voidness internally,
my mind enters into voidness internally and acquires confi-
dence, steadiness, and decision.' In this way he has full aware-
ness of that.

"He gives attention to voidness externally... He gives attention
to voidness internally and externally... He gives attention to
imperturbability. While he is giving attention to imperturbability,
his mind enters into imperturbability and acquires confidence,
steadiness, and decision. When that is so, he understands thus:
'While I am giving attention to imperturbability, my mind
enters into imperturbability and acquires confidence, steadiness,
and decision.' In this way he has full awareness of that.

11. "When a bhikkhu abides thus, if his mind inclines to walk-
ing, he walks, thinking: 'While I am walking thus, no evil
unwholesome states of covetousness and grief will beset me.'
[113] In this way he has full awareness of that. And when a


974 Mahasunnata Sutta: Sutta 122


iii 114


bhikkhu abides thus, if his mind inclines to standing, he
stands... If his mind inclines to sitting, he sits... If his mind
inclines to lying down, he lies down, thinking: 'While I am lying
down thus, no evil unwholesome states will beset me.' In this
way he has full awareness of that.

12. "When a bhikkhu abides thus, if his mind inclines to
talking, he resolves: 'Such talk as is low, vulgar, coarse, igno-
ble, unbeneficial, and which does not lead to disenchantment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, direct knowledge, enlightenment,
and Nibbana, that is, talk of kings, robbers, ministers, armies,
dangers, battles, food, drink, clothing, beds, garlands, perfumes,
relatives, vehicles, villages, towns, cities, countries, women,
heroes, streets, wells, the dead, trivialities, the origin of the world,
the origin of the sea, whether things are so or are not so: such talk
I shall not utter.' In this way he has full awareness of that.

"But he resolves: 'Such talk as deals with effacement, as
favours the mind's release, and which leads to complete disen-
chantment, dispassion, cessation, peace, direct knowledge,
enlightenment, and Nibbana, that is, talk on wanting little, on
contentment, seclusion, aloofness from society, arousing energy,
virtue, concentration, wisdom, deliverance, knowledge and
vision of deliverance: such talk I shall utter.' In this way he has
full awareness of that.

13. "When a bhikkhu abides thus, [114] if his mind inclines to
thinking, he resolves: 'Such thoughts as are low, vulgar, coarse,
ignoble, unbeneficial, and which do not lead to disenchantment,
dispassion, cessation, peace, direct knowledge, enlightenment,
and Nibbana, that is, thoughts of sensual desire, thoughts of ill
will, and thoughts of cruelty: such thoughts I shall not think.' In
this way he has full awareness of that.

"But he resolves: 'Such thoughts as are noble and emancipat-
ing, and lead the one who practises in accordance with them to
the complete destruction of suffering, that is, thoughts of
renunciation, thoughts of non-ill will, and thoughts of non-
cruelty: such thoughts I shall think.' In this way he has full
awareness of that.

14. "Ananda, there are these five cords of sensual pleasure. 1155
What five? Forms cognizable by the eye that are wished for,
desired, agreeable, and likeable, connected with sensual desire


iii 115


The Greater Discourse on Voidness 975


and provocative of lust. Sounds cognizable by the ear... Odours
cognizable by the nose... Flavours cognizable by the tongue...
Tangibles cognizable by the body that are wished for, desired,
agreeable, and likeable, connected with sensual desire and
provocative of lust. These are the five cords of sensual pleasure.

15. "Herein a bhikkhu should constantly review his own mind
thus: 'Does any mental excitement concerning these five cords of
sensual pleasure ever arise in me on any occasion?' If, on
reviewing his mind, the bhikkhu understands: 'Mental excite-
ment concerning these five cords of sensual pleasure does arise
in me on certain occasions,' then he understands: 'Desire and
lust for the five cords of sensual pleasure are unabandoned in
me.' In this way he has full awareness of that. But if, on review-
ing his mind, the bhikkhu understands: 'No mental excitement
concerning these five cords of sensual pleasure arises in me on
any occasion,' then he understands: 'Desire and lust for the five
cords of sensual pleasure are abandoned in me.' In this way he
has full awareness of that.

16. "Ananda, there are these five aggregates affected by cling-
ing, 1156 in regard to which a bhikkhu should abide contemplat-
ing rise and fall thus: 'Such is material form, such its arising,
such its disappearance; such is feeling, such [115] its arising,
such its disappearance; such is perception, such its arising, such
its disappearance; such are formations, such their arising, such
their disappearance; such is consciousness, such its arising, such
its disappearance.'

17. "When he abides contemplating rise and fall in these five
aggregates affected by clinging, the conceit 'I am' based on these
five aggregates affected by clinging is abandoned in him. When
that is so, that bhikkhu understands: 'The conceit "I am" based
on these five aggregates affected by clinging is abandoned in
me.' In that way he has full awareness of that.

18. "These states have an entirely wholesome basis; they are
noble, supramundane, and inaccessible to the Evil One.

19. "What do you think, Ananda? What good does a disciple
see that he should seek the Teacher's company even if he is told
to go away?"

"Venerable sir, our teachings are rooted in the Blessed One,
guided by the Blessed One, have the Blessed One as their resort.




976 Mahasunfiata Sutta: Sutta 122


iii 116


It would be good if the Blessed One would explain the meaning
of these words. Having heard it from the Blessed One, the
bhikkhus will remember it."

20. "Ananda, a disciple should not seek the Teacher's com-
pany for the sake of discourses, stanzas, and expositions. Why is
that? For a long time, Ananda, you have learned the teachings,
remembered them, recited them verbally, examined them with
the mind, and penetrated them well by view. But such talk as
deals with effacement, as favours the mind's release, and which
leads to complete disenchantment, dispassion, cessation, peace,
direct knowledge, enlightenment, and Nibbana, that is, talk on
wanting little, on contentment, seclusion, aloofness from society,
arousing energy, virtue, concentration, wisdom, deliverance,
knowledge and vision of deliverance: for the sake of such talk a
disciple should seek the Teacher's company even if he is told to
go away.

21. "Since this is so, Ananda, a teacher's undoing may come
about, a pupil's undoing may come about, and the undoing of
one who lives the holy life may come about. 1157

22. "And how does a teacher's undoing come about? Here
some teacher resorts to a secluded resting place: the forest, the
root of a tree, a mountain, a ravine, a hillside cave, a charnel
ground, [116] a jungle thicket, an open space, a heap of straw.
While he lives thus withdrawn, brahmins and householders
from town and country visit him, and as a result he goes astray,
becomes filled with desire, succumbs to craving, and reverts to
luxury. This teacher is said to be undone by the teacher's undo-
ing. He has been struck down by evil unwholesome states that
defile, bring renewal of being, give trouble, ripen in suffering,
and lead to future birth, ageing, and death. This is how the
teacher's undoing comes about.

23. "And how does a pupil's undoing come about? A pupil of
that teacher, emulating the teacher's seclusion, resorts to a
secluded resting place: the forest... a heap of straw. While he
lives thus withdrawn, brahmins and householders from town
and country visit him, and as a result he goes astray, becomes
filled with desire, succumbs to craving, and reverts to luxury.
This pupil is said to be undone by the pupil's undoing. He has
been struck down by evil unwholesome states that defile, bring
renewal of being, give trouble, ripen in suffering, and lead to


iii 117


The Greater Discourse on Voidness 977


future birth, ageing, and death. This is how the pupil's undoing
comes about.

24. "And how does the undoing of one who lives the holy life
come about? Here a Tathagata appears in the world, accom-
plished and fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge and
conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of
persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened,
blessed. He resorts to a secluded resting place: the forest... a
heap of straw. While he lives thus withdrawn, brahmins and
householders from town and country visit him, yet he does not
go astray, or become filled with desire, succumb to craving, and
revert to luxury. [117] But a disciple of this teacher, emulating
his teacher's seclusion, resorts to a secluded resting place: the
forest... a heap of straw. While he lives thus withdrawn, brah-
mins and householders from town and country visit him, and as
a result he goes astray, becomes filled with desire, succumbs to
craving, and reverts to luxury. This one who lives the holy life is
said to be undone by the undoing of one who lives the holy life.
He has been struck down by evil unwholesome states that
defile, bring renewal of being, give trouble, ripen in suffering,
and lead to future birth, ageing, and death. Thus there comes to
be the undoing of one who leads the holy life. And herein,
Ananda, the undoing of one who leads the holy life has a more
painful result, a more bitter result, than the teacher's undoing or
the pupil's undoing, and it even leads to perdition. 1158

25. "Therefore, Ananda, behave towards me with friendliness,
not with hostility. That will lead to your welfare and happiness
for a long time. And how do disciples behave towards the
Teacher with hostility, not with friendliness? Here, Ananda,
compassionate and seeking their welfare, the Teacher teaches
the Dhamma to the disciples out of compassion: 'This is for your
welfare, this is for your happiness.' His disciples do not want to
hear or give ear or exert their minds to understand; they err and
turn aside from the Teacher's Dispensation. Thus do disciples
behave towards the Teacher with hostility, not with friendliness.

26. "And how do disciples behave towards the Teacher with
friendliness, not with hostility? Here, Ananda, compassionate
and seeking their welfare, the Teacher teaches the Dhamma to
the disciples out of compassion: 'This is for your welfare, this is
for your happiness.' His disciples want to hear and give ear and



978 Mahasunnata Sutta: Sutta 122


iii 118


exert their minds to understand; they do not err and turn aside
from the Teacher's Dispensation. Thus do disciples behave
towards the Teacher with friendliness, not with hostility. [118]
Therefore, Amanda, behave towards me with friendliness, not
with hostility. That will lead to your welfare and happiness for a
long time.

27. "I shall not treat you as the potter treats the raw damp
clay. Repeatedly restraining you, I shall speak to you, Ananda.
Repeatedly admonishing you, I shall speak to you, Ananda. The
sound core will stand [the test]." 1159

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Ananda was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


123 Acchariya-abbhuta Sutta
Wonderful and Marvellous


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.

2. Now a number of bhikkhus were sitting in the assembly
hall, where they had met together on returning from their alms-
round, after their meal, when this discussion arose among them:
"It is wonderful, friends, it is marvellous, how mighty and
powerful is the Tathagata! For he is able to know about the
Buddhas of the past - who attained to final Nibbana, cut [the
tangle of] proliferation, broke the cycle, ended the round, and
surmounted all suffering - that for those Blessed Ones their
birth was thus, their names were thus, their clans were thus,
their virtue was thus, their state [of concentration] was thus,
their wisdom was thus, their abiding [in attainments] was thus,
their deliverance was thus." 1160

When this was said, the venerable Ananda told the bhikkhus:
"Friends, Tathagatas are wonderful and have wonderful qualities.
Tathagatas are marvellous and have marvellous qualities." [119]

However, their discussion was interrupted; for the Blessed
One rose from meditation when it was evening, went to the
assembly hall, and sat down on a seat made ready. Then he
addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus, for what discussion are
you sitting together here now? And what was your discussion
that was interrupted?"

"Here, venerable sir, we were sitting in the assembly hall,
where we had met together on returning from our almsround,
after our meal, when this discussion arose among us: 'It is won-
derful, friends, it is marvellous... their deliverance was thus.'
When this was said, venerable sir, the venerable Ananda said to
us: 'Friends, Tathagatas are wonderful and have wonderful


979



980 Acchariya-abbhuta Sutta: Sutta 123


iii 120


qualities. Tathagatas are marvellous and have marvellous
qualities.' This was our discussion, venerable sir, that was inter-
rupted when the Blessed One arrived."

Then the Blessed One addressed the venerable Ananda: "That
being so, Ananda, explain more fully the Tathagata's wonderful
and marvellous qualities."

3. "I heard and learned this, venerable sir, from the Blessed
One's own lips: 'Mindful and fully aware, Ananda, the Bodhi-
satta appeared in the Tusita heaven.' 1161 That [120] mindful and
fully aware the Bodhisatta appeared in the Tusita heaven - this
I remember as a wonderful and marvellous quality of the
Blessed One.

4. "I heard and learned this from the Blessed One's own lips:
'Mindful and fully aware the Bodhisatta remained in the Tusita
heaven.' This too I remember as a wonderful and marvellous
quality of the Blessed One.

5. "I heard and learned this from the Blessed One's own lips:
'For the whole of his life-span the Bodhisatta remained in the
Tusita heaven.' This too I remember as a wonderful and marvel-
lous quality of the Blessed One.

6. "I heard and learned this from the Blessed One's own lips:
'Mindful and fully aware the Bodhisatta passed away from the
Tusita heaven and descended into his mother's womb.' This too
I remember as a wonderful and marvellous quality of the
Blessed One.

7. "I heard and learned this from the Blessed One's own lips:
'When the Bodhisatta passed away from the Tusita heaven and
descended into his mother's womb, then a great immeasurable
light surpassing the splendour of the gods appeared in the world
with its gods, its Maras, and its Brahmas, in this generation with
its recluses and brahmins, with its princes and its people. And
even in those abysmal world interspaces of vacancy, gloom, and
utter darkness, where the moon and the sun, mighty and power-
ful as they are, cannot make their light prevail - there too a great
immeasurable light surpassing the splendour of the gods
appeared. 1162 And the beings born there perceived each other by
that light: "So other beings, indeed, have appeared here." And
this ten-thousandfold world system shook and quaked and trem-
bled, and there too a great immeasurable light surpassing the


iii 121


Wonderful and Marvellous 981


splendour of the gods appeared.' This too I remember as a won-
derful and marvellous quality of the Blessed One.

8. "I heard and learned this from the Blessed One's own lips:
'When the Bodhisatta had descended into his mother's womb,
four young deities came to guard him at the four quarters so
that no humans or non-humans or anyone at all could harm the
Bodhisatta or his mother.' 1163 This too I remember as a wonder-
ful and marvellous quality of the Blessed One.

9. "I heard and learned this from the Blessed One's own lips:
'When the Bodhisatta had descended into his mother's womb,
she became intrinsically virtuous, refraining from killing living
beings, from taking what is not given, from misconduct in sen-
sual pleasures, from false speech, and from wines, liquors, and
intoxicants, which are the basis of negligence.' This too I
remember as a wonderful and marvellous quality of the
Blessed One. [121]

10. "I heard and learned this from the Blessed One's own lips:
'When the Bodhisatta had descended into his mother's womb, no
sensual thought arose in her concerning men, and she was inac-
cessible to any man having a lustful mind.' This too I remember
as a wonderful and marvellous quality of the Blessed One.

11. "I heard and learned this from the Blessed One's own lips:
'When the Bodhisatta had descended into his mother's womb,
she obtained the five cords of sensual pleasure, and furnished
and endowed with them, she enjoyed herself with them.' This
too I remember as a wonderful and marvellous quality of the
Blessed One.

12. "I heard and learned this from the Blessed One's own lips:
'When the Bodhisatta had descended into his mother's womb,
no kind of affliction arose in her; she was blissful and free from
bodily fatigue. She saw the Bodhisatta within her womb with all
his limbs, lacking no faculty. Suppose a blue, yellow, red, white,
or brown thread were strung through a fine beryl gem of purest
water, eight-faceted, well cut, and a man with good sight were
to take it in his hand and review it thus: "This is a fine beryl gem
of purest water, eight-faceted, well cut, and through it is strung
a blue, yellow, red, white, or brown thread"; so too when the
Bodhisatta had descended into his mother's womb... she saw
the Bodhisatta within her womb with all his limbs, lacking no


982 Acchariya-abbhuta Sutta: Sutta 123


iii 123


faculty.' This too I remember as a wonderful and marvellous
quality of the Blessed One. [122]

13. "I heard and learned this from the Blessed One's own lips:
'Seven days after the birth of the Bodhisatta, his mother died
and reappeared in the Tusita heaven.' 1164 This too I remember as
a wonderful and marvellous quality of the Blessed One.

14. "I heard and learned this from the Blessed One's own lips:
'Other women give birth after carrying the child in the womb
for nine or ten months, but not so the Bodhisatta's mother. The
Bodhisatta's mother gave birth after carrying him in her womb
for exactly ten months.' This too I remember as a wonderful and
marvellous quality of the Blessed One.

15. "I heard and learned this from the Blessed One's own lips:
'Other women give birth seated or lying down, but not so the
Bodhisatta's mother. The Bodhisatta's mother gave birth to him
standing up.' This too I remember as a wonderful and marvel-
lous quality of the Blessed One.

16. "I heard and learned this from the Blessed One's own lips:
'When the Bodhisatta came forth from his mother's womb, first
gods received him, then human beings.' This too I remember as
a wonderful and marvellous quality of the Blessed One.

17. "I heard and learned this from the Blessed One's own lips:
'When the Bodhisatta came forth from his mother's womb, he
did not touch the earth. The four young gods received him and
set him before his mother saying: "Rejoice, O queen, a son of
great power has been born to you.'" This too I remember as a
wonderful and marvellous quality of the Blessed One.

18. "I heard and learned this from the Blessed One's own lips:
'When the Bodhisatta came forth from his mother's womb, he
came forth unsullied, unsmeared [123] by water or humours or
blood or any kind of impurity, clean, and unsullied. Suppose
there were a gem placed on Kasi cloth, then the gem would not
smear the cloth or the cloth the gem. Why is that? Because of the
purity of both. So too when the Bodhisatta came forth... clean
and unsullied.' This too I remember as a wonderful and marvel-
lous quality of the Blessed One.

19. "I heard and learned this from the Blessed One's own
lips: 'When the Bodhisatta came forth from his mother's
womb, two jets of water appeared to pour from the sky, one
cool and one warm, for bathing the Bodhisatta and his mother.'


iii 124


Wonderful and Marvellous 983


This too I remember as a wonderful and marvellous quality of
the Blessed One.

20. "I heard and learned this from the Blessed One's own lips:
'As soon as the Bodhisatta was bom, he stood firmly with his
feet on the ground; then he took seven steps north, and with a
white parasol held over him, he surveyed each quarter and
uttered the words of the Leader of the Herd: "I am the highest in
the world; I am the best in the world; I am the foremost in the
world. This is my last birth; now there is no renewal of being for
me. "'lies This too I remember as a wonderful and marvellous
quality of the Blessed One.

21. "I heard and learned this from the Blessed One's own lips:
'When the Bodhisatta came forth from his mother's womb, then
a great immeasurable light surpassing the splendour of the gods
appeared in the world with its gods, its Maras, and its Brahmas,
in this generation with its recluses and brahmins, with its
princes and its people. And even in those abysmal world inter-
spaces of vacancy, gloom, and utter darkness, where the moon
and the sun, mighty and powerful as they are, cannot make
their light prevail - [124] there too a great immeasurable light
surpassing the splendour of the gods appeared. And the beings
born there perceived each other by that light: "So other beings,
indeed, have appeared here." And this ten-thousandfold world
system shook and quaked and trembled, and there too a great
immeasurable light surpassing the splendour of the gods
appeared.' That when the Bodhisatta came forth from his mother's
womb, then a great immeasurable light surpassing the splen-
dour of the gods appeared. ..this too I remember as a wonderful
and marvellous quality of the Blessed One."

22. "That being so, Ananda, remember this too as a wonderful
and marvellous quality of the Tathagata: Here, Ananda, for fhe
Tathagata feelings are known as they arise, as they are present,
as they disappear; perceptions are known as they arise, as they
are present, as they disappear; thoughts are known as they arise,
as they are present, as they disappear. 1166 Remember this too,
Ananda, as a wonderful and marvellous quality of the
Tathagata."

23. "Venerable sir, since for the Blessed One feelings are
known as they arise, as they are present, as they disappear; per-
ceptions are known as they arise, as they are present, as they


984 Acchariya-abbhuta Sutta: Sutta 123


iii 124


disappear; thoughts are known as they arise, as they are present,
as they disappear - this too I remember as a wonderful and mar-
vellous quality of the Blessed One."

That is what the venerable Ananda said. The Teacher approved.
The bhikkhus were satisfied and delighted in the venerable
Ananda's words.


124 Bakkula Sutta
Bakkula


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the venerable Bakkula
was living at Rajagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels'
Sanctuary. 1167

2. Then Acela Kassapa, a former companion of the venerable
Bakkula in his lay life, [125] went to the venerable Bakkula and
exchanged greetings with him. When this courteous and ami-
able talk was finished, he sat down at one side and asked the
venerable Bakkula:

3. "Friend Bakkula, how long is it since you went forth?"

"It is eighty years since I went forth, friend."

"Friend Bakkula, in these eighty years how many times have
you engaged in sexual intercourse?"

"Friend Kassapa, you should not ask me such a question as
that. You should ask me such a question as this: 'Friend
Bakkula, in these eighty years how many times have percep-
tions of sensual desire arisen in you?'"

"Friend Bakkula, in these eighty years how many times have
perceptions of sensual desire arisen in you?"

"Friend Kassapa, in the eighty years since I went forth I do not
recall any perception of sensual desire to have ever arisen in me."
[That in the eighty years since he went forth the vener- .
able Bakkula did not recall any perception of sensual
desire to have ever arisen in him - this we remember as
a wonderful and marvellous quality of the venerable
Bakkula.] 1168

4-5. "Friend, in the eighty years since I went forth I do not
recall any perception of ill will... any perception of cruelty to
have ever arisen in me."

[That in the eighty years since he went forth the vener-
able Bakkula did not recall any perception of ill will...


985


986 Bakkula Sutta: Sutta 124


iii 126


any perception of cruelty to have ever arisen in him -
this we remember as a wonderful and marvellous quali-
ty of the venerable Bakkula.]

6. "Friend, in the eighty years since I went forth I do not recall
any thought of sensual desire to have ever arisen in me."

[...this too we remember as a wonderful and marvel-
lous quality of the venerable Bakkula.]

7-8. "Friend, in the eighty years since I went forth I do not
recall any thought of ill will... any thought of cruelty to have
ever arisen in me."

[...this too we remember as a wonderful and marvel-
lous quality of the venerable Bakkula.] [126]

9-15. "Friend, in the eighty years since I went forth I do not
recall ever having accepted a robe from a householder 1169 ... ever
having worn a robe given by a householder... ever having cut a
robe with a cutter... ever having sewn a robe with a needle...
ever having coloured a robe with dye... ever having sewn a robe
at the kathina time... ever having worked on making robes for
my companions in the holy life."

[...this too we remember as a wonderful and marvel-
lous quality of the venerable Bakkula.]

16-19. "Friend, in the eighty years since I went forth I do not
recall ever having accepted an invitation to a meal... ever having
given rise to the thought: 'Oh, may someone invite me to a
meal!'. ..ever having sat down inside a house. ..ever having
eaten inside a house." ,

[...this too we remember as a wonderful and marvel-
lous quality of the venerable Bakkula.]

20-25. "Friend, in the eighty years since I went forth I do not
recall ever having grasped at the signs and features of a
woman... ever having taught the Dhamma to a woman, even as
much as a four-line stanza. . .ever having gone to the bhikkhunls'
quarters... ever having taught the Dhamma to a bhikkhunl...
ever having taught the Dhamma to a female probationer... ever
having taught the Dhamma to a female novice."

[...this too we remember as a wonderful and marvel-
lous quality of the venerable Bakkula.]

26-29. "Friend, in the eighty years since I went forth I do not
recall ever having given the going forth... ever having given the


iii 127


Bakkula 987


full admission... ever having given dependence... ever having
had a novice wait on me."

[...this too we remember as a wonderful and marvel-
lous quality of the venerable Bakkula.]

30-37. "Friend, in the eighty years since I went forth I do not
recall ever having bathed in a bath house... ever having bathed
with bath powder... ever having undertaking the work of mas-
saging the limbs of my companions in the holy life [127]... ever
having had an affliction arise in me even for as long as it takes to
milk a cow... ever having taken medicine, even as much as a
piece of gallnut. . .ever having used a bolster. . .ever having made
up a bed. . .ever having entered upon residence for the Rains in a
resting place inside a village."

[...this too we remember as a wonderful and marvel-
lous quality of the venerable Bakkula.]

38. "Friend, for seven days after going forth I ate the country's
almsfood as a debtor; on the eighth day final knowledge
arose." 1170

[That for seven days the venerable Bakkula ate the
country's almsfood as a debtor, and on the eighth day
final knowledge arose - this too we remember as a won-
derful and marvellous quality of the venerable
Bakkula.]

39. [Then Acela Kassapa said:] "I would receive the going
forth in this Dhamma and Discipline, I would receive the full
admission." And Acela Kassapa received the going forth in this
Dhamma and Discipline, he received the full admission. 1171 And
soon, not long after his full admission, dwelling alone, with-
drawn, diligent, ardent, and resolute, the venerable Kassapa, by
realising for himself with direct knowledge, here and now
entered upon and abided in that supreme goal of the holy life
for the sake of which clansmen rightly go forth from the home
life into homelessness. He knew directly: "Birth is destroyed, the
holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done,
there is no more coming to any state of being." And the vener-
able Kassapa became one of the arahants.

40. Then, on a later occasion, the venerable Bakkula took a key
and went from cell to cell, saying: "Come forth, venerable sirs;
come forth, venerable sirs. Today I shall attain final Nibbana."


988 Bakkula Sutta: Sutta 124


iii 128


[That the venerable Bakkula took a key and went from
cell to cell saying: "Come forth, venerable sirs; come
forth, venerable sirs. Today I shall attain final Nibbana"

- this too we remember as a wonderful and marvellous
quality of the venerable Bakkula.] [128]

41. Then, seated in the midst of the Sangha of bhikkhus, the
venerable Bakkula attained final Nibbana. 1172

[That seated in the midst of the Sangha of bhikkhus, the
venerable Bakkula attained final Nibbana - this too we
remember as a wonderful and marvellous quality of the
venerable Bakkula.] 1173


125 Dantabhumi Sutta
The Grade of the Tamed


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Rajagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels' Sanctuary.

2. Now on that occasion the novice Aciravata was living in a
forest hut. Then Prince Jayasena, while wandering and walking
for exercise, went to the novice Aciravata and exchanged greet-
ings with him. 1174 When this courteous and amiable talk was
finished, he sat down at one side and said to the novice Acira-
vata: "Master Aggivessana, I have heard that a bhikkhu who
abides here diligent, ardent, and resolute can achieve unifica-
tion of mind."

"That is so, prince, that is so. A bhikkhu who abides here dili-
gent, ardent, and resolute can achieve unification of mind."

3. "It would be good if Master Aggivessana would teach me
the Dhamma as he has heard it and mastered it."

"I cannot teach you the Dhamma, prince, as I have heard it
and mastered it. For if I were to teach you the Dhamma as I
have heard it and mastered it, you would not understand the
meaning of my words, and that would be wearying and trouble-
some for me." [129]

4. "Let Master Aggivessana teach me the Dhamma as he has
heard it and mastered it. Perhaps I can understand the meaning
of his words."

"I shall teach you the Dhamma, prince, as I have heard it and
mastered it. If you can understand the meaning of my words,
that will be good. But if you cannot understand the meaning,
then leave it at that and do not question me about it further."

"Let Master Aggivessana teach me the Dhamma as he has heard
it and mastered it. If I can understand the meaning of his words,
that will be good. If I cannot understand the meaning, then I
will leave it at that and I will not question him about it further."


989


990 Dantabhumi Sutta: Sutta 125


iii 130


5. Then the novice Aciravata taught Prince Jayasena the
Dhamma as he had heard it and mastered it. After he had spo-
ken, Prince Jayasena remarked: "It is impossible. Master
Aggivessana, it cannot happen that a bhikkhu who abides dili-
gent, ardent, and resolute can achieve unification of mind."
Then, having declared to the novice Aciravata that this was
impossible and could not happen. Prince Jayasena rose from his
seat and departed.

6. Soon after Prince Jayasena had left, the novice Aciravata
went to the Blessed One. After paying homage to the Blessed
One, he sat down at one side and reported to the Blessed One
his entire conversation with Prince Jayasena. When he had fin-
ished, the Blessed One said to him:

7. "Aggivessana, how is it possible that Prince Jayasena, living
in the midst of sensual pleasures, enjoying sensual pleasures,
being devoured by thoughts of sensual pleasures, being con-
sumed by the fever of sensual pleasures, bent on the search for
sensual pleasures, [130] could know, see, or realise that which
must be known through renunciation, seen through renunciation,
attained through renunciation, realised through renunciation?
That is impossible.

8. "Suppose, 1175 Aggivessana, there were two tamable ele-
phants, horses, or oxen that were well tamed and well disci-
plined, and two tamable elephants, horses, or oxen that were
untamed and undisciplined. What do you think, Aggivessana?
Would the two tamable elephants, horses, or oxen that were
well tamed and well disciplined, being tamed, acquire the
behaviour of the tamed, would they arrive at the grade of the
tamed?" - "Yes, venerable sir." - "But would the two tamable
elephants, horses, or oxen that were untamed and undisci-
plined, being untamed, acquire the behaviour of the tamed,
would they arrive at the grade of the tamed, like the two tam-
able elephants, horses, or oxen that were well tamed and well
disciplined?" - "No, venerable sir." - "So too, Aggivessana, it is
impossible that Prince Jayasena, living in the midst of sensual
pleasures,... could know, see, or realise that which must be
known through renunciation, seen through renunciation,
attained through renunciation, realised through renunciation.

9. "Suppose, Aggivessana, there were a high mountain not far
from a village or town, and two friends would leave the village


iii 131


The Grade of the Tamed 991


or town and approach the mountain hand in hand. Having
reached it, one friend would remain below at the foot of the
mountain while the other would climb to the top. Then the friend
who remained below at the foot of the mountain would say to
the friend who stood on the top: 'Well, friend, what do you see,
standing on top of the mountain?' And the other replied:
'Standing on top of the mountain, friend, I see lovely parks, love-
ly groves, lovely meadows, and lovely ponds.' Then the first
friend would say: 'It is impossible, [131] friend, it cannot happen
that while standing on top of the mountain you should see lovely
parks, lovely groves, lovely meadows, and lovely ponds.'

"Then the other friend would come down to the foot of the
mountain, take his friend by the arm, and make him climb to the
top of the mountain. After giving him a few moments to catch
his breath, he would ask: 'Well, friend, standing on top of the
mountain, what do you see?' And his friend would reply:
'Standing on top of the mountain, friend, I see lovely parks,
lovely groves, lovely meadows, and lovely ponds.' Then the
other would say: 'Friend, just a little earlier we heard you say:
"It is impossible, friend, it cannot happen that while standing on
top of the mountain you should see lovely parks. ..lovely
ponds." But just now we heard you say: "Standing on top of the
mountain, friend, I see lovely parks... lovely ponds."' Then the
first friend would reply: 'Because I was obstructed by this high
mountain, friend, I did not see what was there to be seen.'

10. "So too, Aggivessana, Prince Jayasena is obstructed, hin-
dered, blocked, and enveloped by a still greater mass than this -
the mass of ignorance. Thus it is impossible that Prince
Jayasena, living in the midst of sensual pleasures,... could know,
see, or realise that which must be known through renunciation,
seen through renunciation, attained through renunciation,
realised through renunciation.

11. "Aggivessana, if these two similes had occurred to you
[with reference] to Prince Jayasena, he would have spontaneously
acquired confidence in you, and being confident, would have
shown his confidence to you."

"Venerable sir, how could these two similes have occurred to
me [with reference] to Prince Jayasena as they occur to the
Blessed One, since they are spontaneous and have never been
heard before?"


992 Dantabhumi Sutta: Sutta 125


iii 133


[132] 12. "Suppose, Aggivessana, a head-anointed noble king
addresses his elephant woodsman thus: 'Good elephant woods-
man, mount the king's elephant, enter the elephant wood, and
when you see a forest elephant, bind him by the neck to the
king's elephant.' Having replied 'Yes, sire,' the elephant woods-
man mounts the king's elephant, enters the elephant wood, and
when he sees a forest elephant, binds him by the neck to the
king's elephant. The king's elephant leads him out into the
open. It is in this way that a forest elephant comes out into the
open; for the forest elephant clings to the elephant wood.

"Then the elephant woodsman informs the head-anointed
noble king: 'Sire, the forest elephant has come out into the open.'
The king addresses his elephant tamer thus: 'Come, good ele-
phant tamer, tame the forest elephant. Subdue his forest habits,
subdue his forest memories and intentions, subdue his distress,
fatigue, and fever over leaving the forest. Get him to take
delight in the town, inculcate in him habits congenial to human
beings.' Having replied 'Yes, sire,' the elephant tamer plants a
large post in the earth and binds the forest elephant to it by the
neck in order to subdue his forest habits... and to inculcate in
him habits congenial to human beings.

"Then the elephant tamer addresses the elephant with words
that are gentle, pleasing to the ear, and loveable, as go to the
heart, are courteous, desired by many, and agreeable to many.
When the forest elephant [133] is addressed by such words, he
listens, gives ear, and exerts his mind to understand. The ele-
phant tamer next rewards him with grass-fodder and water.
When the forest elephant accepts the grass-fodder and water
from him, the elephant tamer knows: 'Now the king's elephant
will live!'

"Then the elephant tamer trains him further thus: 'Take up,
put down!' When the king's elephant obeys his tamer's orders to
take up and put down and carries out his instructions, the ele-
phant tamer trains him further thus: 'Go forward, go back!'
When the king's elephant obeys his tamer's orders to go forward
and go back and carries out his instructions, the elephant tamer
trains him further thus: 'Get up, sit down!' When the king's ele-
phant obeys his tamer's orders to get up and sit down and car-
ries out his instructions, the elephant tamer trains him further in
the task called imperturbability. He ties a giant plank to his


iii 134


The Grade of the Tamed 993


trunk; a man with a lance in his hand sits on his neck; men with
lances in their hands surround him on all sides; and the elephant
tamer himself stands in front of him holding a long lance pole.
When the elephant is being trained in the task of imperturbability,
he does not move his forelegs or his hindlegs; he does not move
his forequarters or his hindquarters; he does not move his head,
ears, tusks, tail, or trunk. The king's elephant is able to endure
blows from spears, blows from swords, blows from arrows,
blows from other beings, and the thundering sounds of drums,
kettledrums, trumpets, and tomtoms. Being rid of all faults and
defects, purged of flaws, he is worthy of the king, in the king's
service, considered one of the factors of a king. [134]

13-14. "So too, Aggivessana, a Tathagata appears in the
world, accomplished, fully enlightened... (as Sutta 51,
§§12-13 )... he shaves off his hair and beard, puts on the yellow
robe, and goes forth from the home life into homelessness. It is
in this way that a noble disciple comes out into the open; for
gods and humans cling to the five cords of sensual pleasure.

15. "Then the Tathagata disciplines him further: 'Come,
bhikkhu, be virtuous, restrained with the restraint of the Pati-
mokkha, be perfect in conduct and resort, and seeing fear in the
slightest fault, train by undertaking the training precepts.'

16. "When, Aggivessana, the noble disciple is virtuous... and
seeing fear in the slightest fault, trains by undertaking the train-
ing precepts, then the Tathagata disciplines him further: 'Come,
bhikkhu, guard the doors of your sense faculties. On seeing a
form with the eye, do not grasp at its signs and features. Since, if
you were to leave the eye faculty unguarded, evil unwholesome
states of covetousness and grief might invade you, practise the
way of its restraint, guard the eye faculty, undertake the
restraint of the eye faculty. On hearing a sound with the
ear. ..On smelling an odour with the nose.. .On tasting a flavour
with the tongue... On touching a tangible with the body... On
cognizing a mind-object with the mind, do not grasp at its signs
and features. Since, if you were to leave the mind faculty
unguarded, evil unwholesome states of covetousness and grief
might invade you, practise the way of its restraint, guard the
mind faculty, undertake the restraint of the mind faculty.'

17. "When, Aggivessana, the noble disciple guards the doors
of his sense faculties, then the Tathagata disciplines him further:


994 Dantabhumi Sutta: Sutta 125


iii 135


'Come, bhikkhu, be moderate in eating. Reflecting wisely, you
should take food neither for amusement nor for intoxication nor
for the sake of physical beauty and attractiveness, but only for
the endurance and continuance of this body, for ending dis-
comfort, and for assisting the holy life, considering: "Thus I
shall terminate old feelings without arousing new feelings and
I shall be healthy and blameless and shall live in comfort."'

18. "When, [135] Aggivessana, the noble disciple is moderate
in eating, then the Tathagata disciplines him further: 'Come,
bhikkhu, be devoted to wakefulness. During the day, while
walking back and forth and sitting, purify your mind of obstruc-
tive states. In the first watch of the night, while walking back and
forth and sitting, purify your mind of obstructive states. In the
middle watch of the night you should lie down on the right side
in the lion's pose with one foot overlapping the other, mindful
and fully aware, after noting in your mind the time for rising.
After rising, in the last watch of the night, while walking back
and forth and sitting, purify your mind of obstructive states.'

19. "When, Aggivessana, the noble disciple is devoted to
wakefulness, then the Tathagata disciplines him further: 'Come,
bhikkhu, be possessed of mindfulness and full awareness. Act in
full awareness when going forward and returning... when look-
ing ahead and looking away... when flexing and extending your
limbs... when wearing your robes and carrying your outer robe
and bowl... when eating, drinking, consuming food, and tast-
ing... when defecating and urinating... when walking, standing,
sitting, falling asleep, waking up, talking, and keeping silent.'

20. "When, Aggivessana, the noble disciple possesses mind-
fulness and full awareness, then the Tathagata disciplines him
further: 'Come, bhikkhu, resort to a secluded resting place: the
forest, the root of a tree, a mountain, a ravine, a hillside cave, a
charnel ground, a jungle thicket, an open space, a heap of straw.'

21. "He resorts to a secluded resting place: the forest... a heap
of straw. On returning from his almsround, after his meal he sits
down, folding his legs crosswise, setting his body erect, and
establishing mindfulness before him. Abandoning covetousness
for the world, he abides with a mind free from covetousness; he
purifies his mind from covetousness. Abandoning ill will and
hatred, he abides with a mind free from ill will, compassionate
for the welfare of all living beings; he purifies his mind from ill


iii 136


The Grade of the Tamed 995


will and hatred. Abandoning sloth and torpor, he abides free
from sloth and torpor, percipient of light, mindful, and fully
aware; he purifies his mind from sloth and torpor. Abandoning
restlessness and remorse, he abides unagitated with a mind
inwardly peaceful; he purifies his mind from restlessness and
remorse. [136] Abandoning doubt, he abides having gone
beyond doubt, unperplexed about wholesome states; he purifies
his mind from doubt.

22. "Having thus abandoned these five hindrances, imperfec-
tions of the mind that weaken wisdom, he abides contemplating
the body as a body, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having
put away covetousness and grief for the world. He abides con-
templating feelings as feelings... mind as mind... mind-objects as
mind-objects, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put
away covetousness and grief for the world. 1176

23. "Just as, Aggivessana, the elephant tamer plants a large
post in the earth and binds the forest elephant to it by the neck
in order to subdue his forest habits... and to inculcate in him
habits congenial to human beings, so these four foundations of
mindfulness are the bindings for the mind of the noble disciple
in order to subdue his habits based on the household life, to
subdue his memories and intentions based on the household
life, to subdue his distress, fatigue, and fever based on the
household life, and in order that he may attain the true way
and realise Nibbana.

24. "Then the Tathagata disciplines him further: 'Come,
bhikkhu, abide contemplating the body as a body but do not
think thoughts connected with the body; abide contemplating
feelings as feelings but do not think thoughts connected with
feelings; abide contemplating mind as mind but do not think
thoughts connected with the mind; abide contemplating mind-
objects as mind-objects but do not think thoughts connected
with mind-objects.'

25. "With the stilling of applied and sustained thought, he
enters upon and abides in the second jhana 1177 . ..the third
jhana. . .the fourth jhana.

26-29. "When his concentrated mind is thus purified... (as
Sutta 51, §§24-27 ). ..He understands: 'Birth is destroyed, the
holy life has been lived, what had to be done has been done,
there is no more coming to any state of being.'


996 Dantabhumi Sutta: Sutta 125


iii 137


30. "That bhikkhu is able to endure cold and heat, hunger and
thirst, and contact with gadflies, mosquitoes, wind, the sun, and
creeping things; he is able to endure ill-spoken, unwelcome words
and arisen bodily [137] feelings that are painful, racking, sharp,
piercing, disagreeable, distressing, and menacing to life. Being rid
of all lust, hate, and delusion, purged of flaws, he is worthy of
gifts, worthy of hospitality, worthy of offerings, worthy of rev-
erential salutations, an unsurpassed field of merit for the world.

31. "If, Aggivessana, the king's elephant dies in old age
untamed and undisciplined, then he is considered an old ele-
phant that has died an untamed death. If the king's elephant
dies when middle-aged untamed and undisciplined, then he is
considered a middle-aged elephant that has died an untamed
death. If the king's elephant dies when young untamed and
undisciplined, then he is considered a young elephant that has
died an untamed death. So too, Aggivessana, if an elder
bhikkhu dies with his taints undestroyed, then he is considered
an elder bhikkhu who has died an untamed death. If a bhikkhu
of middle status dies with his taints undestroyed, then he is con-
sidered a bhikkhu of middle status who has died an untamed
death. If a newly ordained bhikkhu dies with his taints unde-
stroyed, then he is considered a newly ordained bhikkhu who
has died an untamed death.

32. "If, Aggivessana, the king's elephant dies in old age well
tamed and well disciplined, then he is considered an old ele-
phant that has died a tamed death. If the king's elephant dies
when middle-aged well tamed and well disciplined, then he is
considered a middle-aged elephant that has died a tamed death.
If the king's elephant dies when young well tamed and well dis-
ciplined, then he is considered a young elephant that has died a
tamed death. So too, Aggivessana, if an elder bhikkhu dies with
his taints destroyed, then he is considered an elder bhikkhu who
has died a tamed death. If a bhikkhu of middle status dies with
his taints destroyed, then he is considered a bhikkhu of middle
status who has died a tamed death. If a newly ordained bhikkhu
dies with his taints destroyed, then he is considered a newly
ordained bhikkhu who has died a tamed death."

That is what the Blessed One said. The novice Aciravata was sat-
isfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


126 Bhumija Sutta
Bhumija


[138] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One
was living at Rajagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels'
Sanctuary.

2. Then, when it was morning, the venerable Bhumija dressed,
and taking his bowl and outer robe, went to the house of Prince
Jayasena and sat down on a seat made ready. 1178

3. Then Prince Jayasena went to the venerable Bhumija and
exchanged greetings with him. When this courteous and ami-
able talk was finished, he sat down at one side and said to the
venerable Bhumija: "Master Bhumija, there are some recluses
and brahmins who make such assertions and hold such views as
this: 'If one makes an aspiration 1179 and one leads the holy life,
one is unable to procure any fruit; if one makes no aspiration
and one leads the holy life, one is still unable to procure any
fruit; if one both makes an aspiration and makes no aspiration
and one leads the holy life, one is still unable to procure any
fruit; if one neither makes an aspiration nor makes no aspiration
and one leads the holy life, one is still unable to procure any
fruit.' What does the venerable Bhumija's teacher say here, what
does he declare?"

4. "I have not heard and learned that from the Blessed One's
own lips, prince. But it is possible that the Blessed One might
say this: 'If one makes an aspiration and one leads the holy life
unwisely, one is unable to procure any fruit; if one makes no
aspiration and one leads the holy life unwisely, one is still
unable to procure any fruit; if one both makes an aspiration and
makes no aspiration and one leads the holy life unwisely, one is
still unable to procure any fruit; if one neither makes an aspira-
tion nor makes no aspiration and one leads the holy life unwisely,
one is still unable to procure any fruit. However, if one makes


997


iii 140


998 Bhumija Sutta: Sutta 126


an aspiration and one leads the holy life wisely, one is able to
procure fruit; [139] if one makes no aspiration and one leads the
holy life wisely, one is still able to procure fruit; if one both
makes an aspiration and makes no aspiration and one leads the
holy life wisely, one is still able to procure fruit; if one neither
makes an aspiration nor makes no aspiration and one leads the
holy life wisely, one is still able to procure fruit.' I have not heard
and learned this from the Blessed One's own lips, prince, but it is
possible that the Blessed One would answer as I have stated."

5. "If Master Bhumija's teacher speaks thus, if he declares
thus, then it certainly seems that the venerable Bhumija's
teacher stands ahead of all the ordinary recluses and brahmins."

6. Then Prince Jayasena served the venerable Bhumija from
his own dish of milk rice.

7. Then, when the venerable Bhumija had returned from his
almsround after his meal, he went to the Blessed One. After pay-
ing homage to him, he sat down at one side and told the Blessed
One what had occurred, adding: "Venerable sir, I hope that
when I was asked such a question and answered thus, I said
what has been said by the Blessed One and did not misrepresent
him with what is contrary to fact. I hope I explained in accor-
dance with the Dhamma in such a way that nothing which pro-
vides a ground for censure can be legitimately deduced from
my assertion." [140]

8. "Surely, Bhumija, when you were asked such a question
and answered thus, you said what has been said by me and did
not misrepresent me with what is contrary to fact. You
explained in accordance with the Dhamma in such a way that
nothing which provides a ground for censure can be legitimately
deduced from your assertion.

9. "Whatever recluses and brahmins have wrong view, wrong
intention, wrong speech, wrong action, wrong livelihood, wrong
effort, wrong mindfulness, and wrong concentration, if they
make an aspiration and they lead the holy life, they are unable
to procure any fruit; if they make no aspiration and they lead
the holy life, they are still unable to procure any fruit; if they
both make an aspiration and make no aspiration and they lead
the holy life, they are still unable to procure any fruit; if they
neither make an aspiration nor make no aspiration and they
lead the holy life, they are still unable to procure any fruit. Why


iii 142


Bhumija 999


is that? Because that [wrong path] is not a proper method for
procuring fruit.

10. "Suppose a man needing oil, seeking oil, wandering in
search of oil, were to heap up gravel in a tub, sprinkle it all over
with water, and press it. Then, if he made an aspiration and
acted thus, he would be unable to procure any oil; if he made no
aspiration and acted thus, he would still be unable to procure
any oil; if he both made an aspiration and made no aspiration
and acted thus, he would still be unable to procure any oil; if he
neither made an aspiration nor made no aspiration and acted
thus, he would still be unable to procure any oil. Why is that?
Because that [way of acting] is not a proper method for procur-
ing oil. So too, whatever recluses and brahmins have wrong
view... they are still unable to procure any fruit. [141] Why is
that? Because that [wrong path] is not a proper method for
procuring fruit.

11. "Suppose a man needing milk, seeking milk, wandering in
search of milk, were to pull a recently-calved cow by her horn.
Then, if he made an aspiration... if he made no aspiration... if he
both made an aspiration and made no aspiration... if he neither
made an aspiration nor made no aspiration and acted thus, he
would still be unable to procure any milk. Why is that? Because
that [way of acting] is not a proper method for procuring milk.
So too, whatever recluses and brahmins have wrong view... they
are still unable to procure any fruit. Why is that? Because that
[wrong path] is not a proper method for procuring fruit.

12. "Suppose a man needing butter, seeking butter, wandering
in search of butter, were to pour water into a chum and chum it
with a churning-stick. Then, if he made an aspiration... if he
made no aspiration. . .if he both made an aspiration and made no
aspiration... if he neither made an aspiration nor made no aspi-
ration and acted thus, he would still be unable to procure any
butter. Why is that? Because that [way of acting] is not a proper
method for procuring butter. So too, whatever recluses and
brahmins have wrong view. . .they are still unable to procure any
fruit. Why is that? Because that [wrong path] is not a proper
method for procuring fruit.

13. "Suppose a man needing fire, seeking fire, wandering in
search of fire, were to take an [142] upper fire-stick and mb a wet
sappy piece of wood with it. Then, if he made an aspiration... if


1000 Bhumija Sutta: Sutta 126


iii 143


he made no aspiration. . .if he both made an aspiration and made
no aspiration... if he neither made an aspiration nor made no
aspiration and acted thus, he would still be unable to procure
any fire. Why is that? Because that [way of acting] is not a proper
method for procuring fire. So too, whatever recluses and brah-
mins have wrong view... they are still unable to procure any
fruit. Why is that? Because that [wrong path] is not a proper
method for procuring fruit.

14. "Whatever recluses and brahmins have right view, right
intention, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort,
right mindfulness, and right concentration, if they make an aspi-
ration and they lead the holy life, they are able to procure fruit;
if they make no aspiration and they lead the holy life, they are
still able to procure fruit; if they both make an aspiration and
make no aspiration and they lead the holy life, they are still able
to procure fruit; if they neither make an aspiration nor make no
aspiration and they lead the holy life, they are still able to pro-
cure fruit. Why is that? Because that [right path] is a proper
method for procuring fruit.

15. "Suppose a man needing oil, seeking oil, wandering in
search of oil, were to heap up sesamum flour in a tub, sprinkle it
all over with water, and press it. Then, if he made an aspiration
and acted thus, he would be able to procure oil; if he made no
aspiration and acted thus, he would still be able to procure oil; if
he both made an aspiration and made no aspiration and acted
thus, he would still be able to procure oil; if he neither made an
aspiration nor made no aspiration and acted thus, he would still
be able to procure oil. Why is that? Because that [way of acting]
is a proper method for procuring oil. So too/whatever recluses
and brahmins have right view [143]... they are still able to pro-
cure fruit. Why is that? Because that [right path] is a proper
method for procuring fruit.

16. "Suppose a man needing milk, seeking milk, wandering in
search of milk, were to pull a recently-calved cow by her udder.
Then, if he made an aspiration... if he made no aspiration... if he
both made an aspiration and made no aspiration... if he neither
made an aspiration nor made no aspiration and acted thus, he
would still be able to procure milk. Why is that? Because that
[way of acting] is a proper method for procuring milk. So too,
whatever recluses and brahmins have right view... they are still


iii 144


Bhumija 1001


able to procure fruit. Why is that? Because that [right path] is a
proper method for procuring fruit.

17. "Suppose a man needing butter, seeking butter, wandering
in search of butter, were to pour curd into a churn and chum it
with a churning-stick. Then, if he made an aspiration... if he
made no aspiration. . .if he both made an aspiration and made no
aspiration... if he neither made an aspiration nor made no aspi-
ration and acted thus, he would still be able to procure butter.
Why is that? Because that [way of acting] is a proper method for
procuring butter. So too, whatever recluses and brahmins have
right view... they are still able to procure fruit. Why is that?
Because that [right path] is a proper method for procuring fruit.

18. "Suppose a man needing fire, seeking fire, wandering in
search of fire, were to take an upper fire-stick and rub a dry sap-
less piece of wood with it. Then, if he made an aspiration... [144]
if he made no aspiration... if he both made an aspiration and
made no aspiration... if he neither made an aspiration nor made
no aspiration and acted thus, he would still be able to procure
fire. Why is that? Because that [way of acting] is a proper method
for procuring fire. So too, whatever recluses and brahmins have
right view... they are still able to procure fruit. Why is that?
Because that [right path] is a proper method for procuring fruit.

19. "Bhumija, if these four similes had occurred to you [with
reference] to Prince Jayasena, he would have spontaneously
acquired confidence in you, and being confident, would have
shown his confidence to you."

"Venerable sir, how could these four similes have occurred to
me [with reference] to Prince Jayasena as they occur to the
Blessed One, since they are spontaneous and have never been
heard before?"

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Bhumija was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


127 Anuruddha Sutta
Anuruddha


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.

2. Then the carpenter Pancakanga addressed a certain man
thus: "Come, good man, go to the venerable Anuruddha, [145]
pay homage in my name with your head at his feet, and say:
'Venerable sir, the carpenter Pancakanga pays homage with his
head at the venerable Anuruddha's feet and says: "Venerable sir,
let the venerable Anuruddha with three others consent to accept
tomorrow's meal from the carpenter Pancakanga; and let the
venerable Anuruddha arrive punctually as the carpenter Panca-
kanga is very busy and has much work to do for the king.'""

"Yes, sir," that man replied, and he went to the venerable
Anuruddha. After paying homage to the venerable Anuruddha,
he sat down at one side and delivered his message. The venera-
ble Anuruddha consented in silence.

3. Then, when the night had ended, it being morning, the
venerable Anuruddha dressed, and taking his bowl and outer
robe, he went to the carpenter Pancakanga's house and sat
down on a seat made ready. Then, with his own hands, the car-
penter Pancakanga served and satisfied the venerable
Anuruddha with the various kinds of good food. Then, when
the venerable Anuruddha had eaten and had withdrawn his
hand from his bowl, the carpenter Pancakanga took a low seat,
sat down at one side, and said to the venerable Anuruddha:

4. "Here, venerable sir, elder bhikkhus have come to me and
said: 'Householder, develop the immeasurable deliverance of
mind'; and some elders have said: 'Householder, develop the
exalted deliverance of mind.' Venerable sir, the immeasurable
deliverance of mind and the exalted deliverance of mind 1180 '


iii 147


Anuruddha 1003


are these states different in meaning and [146] different in name,
or are they one in meaning and different only in name?"

5. "Explain it as you see it, householder. Afterwards it will be
cleared up for you."

"Venerable sir, I think thus: the immeasurable deliverance of
mind and the exalted deliverance of mind - these states are one
in meaning and different only in name."

6. "Householder, the immeasurable deliverance of mind and
the exalted deliverance of mind - these states are different in
meaning and different in name. And it should be understood as
follows how these states are different in meaning and different
in name.

7. "What, householder, is the immeasurable deliverance of
mind? Here a bhikkhu abides pervading one quarter with a
mind imbued with loving-kindness, likewise the second, like-
wise the third, likewise the fourth; so above, below, around, and
everywhere, and to all as to himself, he abides pervading the all-
encompassing world with a mind imbued with loving-kindness,
abundant, exalted, immeasurable, without hostility and without
ill will. He abides pervading one quarter with a mind imbued
with compassion... He abides pervading one quarter with a
mind imbued with appreciative joy... He abides pervading one
quarter with a mind imbued with equanimity. . .abundant, exalted,
immeasurable, without hostility and without ill will. This is
called the immeasurable deliverance of mind.

8. "And what, householder, is the exalted deliverance of
mind? Here a bhikkhu abides resolved upon an area the size of
the root of one tree, pervading it as exalted: this is called the
exalted deliverance of mind. 1181 Here a bhikkhu abides resolved
upon an area the size of the roots of two or three trees, pervad-
ing it as exalted: this too is called the exalted deliverance of
mind. Here a bhikkhu abides resolved upon an area the size of
one village, pervading it as exalted. ..[147]. ..an area the size of
two or three villages... an area the size of one major kingdom...
an area the size of two or three major kingdoms... an area the
size of the earth bounded by the ocean, pervading it as exalted:
this too is called the exalted deliverance of mind. It is in this
way, householder, that it can be understood how these states are
different in meaning and different in name.


1004 Anuruddha Sutta: Sutta 127


iii 148


9. "There are, householder, these four kinds of reappearance
[in a future state of] being. 1182 What four? Here someone abides
resolved upon and pervading 'limited radiance'; on the dissolu-
tion of the body, after death, he reappears in the company of the
gods of Limited Radiance. Here someone abides resolved upon
and pervading 'immeasurable radiance'; on the dissolution of
the body, after death, he reappears in the company of the gods
of Immeasurable Radiance. Here someone abides resolved upon
and pervading 'defiled radiance'; on the dissolution of the body,
after death, he reappears in the company of the gods of Defiled
Radiance. Here someone abides resolved upon and pervading
'pure radiance'; on the dissolution of the body, after death, he
reappears in the company of the gods of Pure Radiance. These
are the four kinds of reappearance [in a future state of] being. 1183

10. "There is an occasion, householder, when those deities
assemble in one place. When they have assembled in one place,
a difference in their colour can be discerned but no difference in
their radiance. Just as, if a man were to bring several oil-lamps
into a house, a difference in the flames of the lamps might be
discerned but no difference in their radiance; so too, there is an
occasion when those deities assemble in one place [148] . . .but no
difference in their radiance.

11. "There is an occasion, householder, when those deities dis-
perse from there. When they have dispersed, a difference in
their colours can be discerned and also a difference in their radi-
ance. Just as, if the man were to remove those several oil-lamps
from that house, a difference might be discerned in the flames of
the lamps and also a difference in their radiance; so too, there is
an occasion when those deities disperse from there... and also a
difference in their radiance.

12. "It does not occur to those deities: 'This [life] of ours is per-
manent, everlasting, and eternal/ yet wherever those deities set-
tle down, there they find delight. Just as, when flies are being
carried along on a carrying-pole or on a basket, it does not occur
to them: 'This [life] of ours is permanent, everlasting, or eternal,'
yet wherever those flies settle down, there they find delight; so
too, it does not occur to those deities... yet wherever they settle
down, there they find delight."

13. When this was said, the venerable Abhiya Kaccana said to
the venerable Anuruddha: "Good, venerable Anuruddha, yet I


iii 151


Anuruddha 1005


have something further to ask: Are all those radiant ones deities
of Limited Radiance, or are some of them deities of Immeasur-
able Radiance?"

"By reason of the factor [responsible for rebirth], friend
Kaccana, some are deities of Limited Radiance, some deities of
Immeasurable Radiance."

14. "Venerable Anuruddha, what is the cause and reason why
among those deities that have reappeared in a single order of
gods, [149] some are deities of Limited Radiance, some deities of
Immeasurable Radiance?"

"As to that, friend Kaccana, I shall ask you a question in
return. Answer it as you choose. What do you think, friend
Kaccana? When one bhikkhu abides resolved upon an area the
size of the root of one tree, pervading it as exalted, and another
bhikkhu abides resolved upon the area the size of the roots of
two or three trees, pervading it as exalted - which of these
types of mental development is more exalted?" - "The second,
venerable sir."

"What do you think, friend Kaccana? When one bhikkhu
abides resolved upon an area the size of the roots of two or three
trees, pervading it as exalted, and another bhikkhu abides
resolved upon an area the size of one village, pervading it as
exalted... an area the size of one village and an area the size of
two or three villages. ..an area the size of two or three villages
[150] and an area the size of one major kingdom... an area the
size of one major kingdom and an area the size of two or three
major kingdoms... an area the size of two or three major king-
doms and an area the size of the earth bounded by the ocean,
pervading it as exalted - which of these two types of mental
development is more exalted?" - "The second, venerable sir."

"This is the cause and reason, friend Kaccana, why among
those deities that have reappeared in a single order of gods,
some are deities of Limited Radiance, some deities of Immeasur-
able Radiance."

15. "Good, venerable Anuruddha, yet I have something fur-
ther to ask: Are all those radiant ones deities of Defiled
Radiance, or are some of them deities of Pure Radiance?" [151]

"By reason of the factor [responsible for rebirth], friend
Kaccana, some are deities of Defiled Radiance, some deities of
Pure Radiance."


1006 Anuruddha Sutta: Sutta 127


iii 152


16. "Venerable Anuruddha, what is the cause and reason why
among those deities that have reappeared in a single order of
gods, some are deities of Defiled Radiance, some deities of Pure
Radiance?"

"As to that, friend Kaccana, I shall give a simile, for some wise
men here understand the meaning of a statement by means of a
simile. Suppose an oil-lamp is burning with impure oil and an
impure wick; because of the impurity of its oil and its wick it
bums dimly. So too, here a bhikkhu abides resolved upon and
pervading [an area with] a defiled radiance. His bodily inertia
has not fully subsided, his sloth and torpor have not been fully
eliminated, his restlessness and remorse have not been fully
removed; because of this he meditates, as it were, dimly. 1184 On
the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears in the com-
pany of the gods of Defiled Radiance.

"Suppose an oil-lamp is burning with pure oil and a pure
wick; because of the purity of its oil and its wick it does not burn
dimly. So too, here a bhikkhu abides resolved upon and pervad-
ing [an area with] a pure radiance. His bodily inertia has fully
subsided, his sloth and torpor have been fully eliminated, his
restlessness and remorse have been fully removed; because of
this he meditates, as it were, brightly. On the dissolution of the
body, after death, he reappears in the company of the gods of
Pure Radiance. [152]

"This is the cause and reason, friend Kaccana, why among
those deities that have reappeared in the same order of gods,
some are deities of Defiled Radiance, some deities of Pure
Radiance."

17. When this was said, the venerable Abhiya Kaccana said to
the venerable Anuruddha: "Good, venerable Anuruddha. The
venerable Anuruddha does not say: 'Thus have I heard' or 'It
should be thus.' Rather, the venerable Anuruddha says: "These
gods are thus and those gods are such.' It occurs to me, vener-
able sir, that the venerable Anuruddha certainly has associated
with those deities and talked with them and held conversations
with them."

"Certainly, friend Kaccana, your words are offensive and dis-
courteous, but still I will answer you. Over a long time I have
associated with those deities and talked with them and held
conversations with them." 1185


iii 152


Anuruddha 1007


18. When this was said, the venerable Abhiya Kaccana said to
the carpenter Pancakanga: "It is a gain for you, householder, it is
a great gain for you that you have abandoned your state of
doubt and have had the opportunity to hear this discourse on
the Dhamma."


128 Upakkilesa Sutta
Imperfections


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at KosambI in Ghosita's Park.

2. Now on that occasion the bhikkhus at KosambI had taken to
quarrelling and brawling and were deep in disputes, stabbing
each other with verbal daggers. 1186

3. Then a certain bhikkhu went to the Blessed One, [153] and
after paying homage to him, he stood at one side and said:
"Venerable sir, the bhikkhus here at KosambI have taken to
quarrelling and brawling and are deep in disputes, stabbing
each other with verbal daggers. It would be good, venerable sir,
if the Blessed One would go to those bhikkhus out of compas-
sion." The Blessed One consented in silence.

4. Then the Blessed One went to those bhikkhus and said to
them: "Enough, bhikkhus, let there be no quarrelling, brawling,
wrangling, or dispute." When this was said, a certain bhikkhu
said to the Blessed One: "Wait, venerable sir! Let the Blessed
One, the Lord of the Dhamma, live at ease devoted to a pleasant
abiding here and now. We are the ones who will be responsible
for this quarrelling, brawling, wrangling, and dispute."

For a second time... For a third time the Blessed One said:
"Enough, bhikkhus, let there be no quarrelling, brawling, wran-
gling, or dispute." For a third time that bhikkhu said to the Blessed
One: "Wait, venerable sir!... We are the ones who will be respon-
sible for this quarrelling, brawling, wrangling, and dispute."

5. Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One dressed, and
taking his bowl and outer robe, entered KosambI for alms.
When he had wandered for alms in KosambI and had returned
from his almsround, after his meal he set his resting place in
order, took his bowl and outer robe, and while still standing
uttered these stanzas: [154]


iii 154


Imperfections 1009


6. "When many voices shout at once
None considers himself a fool;

Though the Sangha is being split
None thinks himself to be at fault.

They have forgotten thoughtful speech,
They talk obsessed by words alone.
Uncurbed their mouths, they bawl at will;
None knows what leads him so to act.

'He abused me, he struck me, 1187
He defeated me, he robbed me' -
In those who harbour thoughts like these
Hatred will never be allayed.

For in this world hatred is never
Allayed by further acts of hate.

It is allayed by non-hatred:

That is the fixed and ageless law.

Those others do not recognise

That here we should restrain ourselves.

But those wise ones who realise this
At once end all their enmity.

Breakers of bones and murderers.

Those who steal cattle, horses, wealth.
Those who pillage the entire realm -
When even these can act together
Why can you not do so too?

If one can find a worthy friend,

A virtuous, steadfast companion,

Then overcome all threats of danger
And walk with him content and mindful.

But if one finds no worthy friend.

No virtuous, steadfast companion.

Then as a king leaves his conquered realm.
Walk like a tusker in the woods alone.


iii 155


1010 Upakkilesa Sutta: Sutta 128


Better it is to walk alone.

There is no companionship with fools.

Walk alone and do no evil.

At ease like a tusker in the woods."

7. Then, having uttered these stanzas while standing, the
Blessed One went to the village of Balakalonakara. On that occa-
sion [155] the venerable Bhagu was living at the village of
Balakalonakara. When the venerable Bhagu saw the Blessed One
coming in the distance, he prepared a seat and set out water for
washing the feet. The Blessed One sat down on the seat made
ready and washed his feet. The venerable Bhagu paid homage to
the Blessed One and sat down at one side, and the Blessed One
said to him: "I hope you are keeping well, bhikkhu, I hope you
are comfortable, I hope you are not having any trouble getting
almsfood."

"I am keeping well, Blessed One, I am comfortable, and I am
not having any trouble getting almsfood."

Then the Blessed One instructed, urged, roused, and encour-
aged the venerable Bhagu with talk on the Dhamma, after which
he rose from his seat and went to the Eastern Bamboo Park.

8. Now on that occasion the venerable Anuruddha, the vener-
able Nandiya and the venerable Kimbila were living at the
Eastern Bamboo Park. 2388 The park keeper saw the Blessed One
coming in the distance and told him: "Do not enter this park,
recluse. There are three clansmen here seeking their own good.
Do not disturb them."

9. The venerable Anuruddha heard the park keeper speaking
to the Blessed One and told him: "Friend park keeper, do not
keep the Blessed One out. It is our Teacher, the Blessed One, who
has come." Then the venerable Anuruddha went to the venerable
Nandiya and the venerable Kimbila and said: "Come out, vener-
able sirs, come out! Our Teacher, the Blessed One, has come."

10. Then all three went to meet the Blessed One. One took his
bowl and outer robe, one prepared a seat, and one set out water
for washing the feet. The Blessed One sat down on the seat
made ready and washed his feet. Then those three venerable
ones paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down at one side,
and the Blessed One said to them: "I hope you are all keeping


iii 157


Imperfections 1011


well, Anuruddha, I hope you are comfortable, I hope you are
not having any trouble getting almsfood." [156]

"We are keeping well. Blessed One, we are comfortable, and
we are not having any trouble getting almsfood."

11. "I hope, Anuruddha, that you are all living in concord,
with mutual appreciation, without disputing, blending like milk
and water, viewing each other with kindly eyes."

"Surely, venerable sir, we are living in concord, with mutual
appreciation, without disputing, blending like milk and water,
viewing each other with kindly eyes."

"But, Anuruddha, how do you live thus?"

12. "Venerable sir, as to that, I think thus: It is a gain for me, it
is a great gain for me that I am living with such companions in
the holy life.' I maintain bodily acts of loving-kindness towards
these venerable ones both openly and privately; I maintain ver-
bal acts of loving-kindness towards them both openly and pri-
vately; I maintain mental acts of loving-kindness towards them
both openly and privately. I consider: 'Why should I not set
aside what I wish to do and do what these venerable ones wish
to do?' Then I set aside what I wish to do and do what these
venerable ones wish to do. We are different in body, venerable
sir, but one in mind."

The venerable Nandiya and the venerable Kimbila each spoke
likewise, adding: "That is how, venerable sir, we are living in
concord, with mutual appreciation, without disputing, blending
like milk and water, viewing each other with kindly eyes."

13. "Good, good, Anuruddha. I hope that you all abide dili-
gent, ardent, and resolute." [157]

"Surely, venerable sir, we abide diligent, ardent, and resolute."

"But, Anuruddha, how do you abide thus?"

14. "Venerable sir, as to that, whichever of us returns first
from the village with almsfood prepares the seats, sets out the
water for drinking and for washing, and puts the refuse bucket
in its place. Whichever of us returns last eats any food left over,
if he wishes; otherwise he throws it away where there is no
greenery or drops it into water where there is no life. He puts
away the seats and the water for drinking and for washing. He
puts away the refuse bucket after washing it, and he sweeps out
the refectory. Whoever notices that the pots of water for drink-
ing, washing, or the latrine are low or empty takes care of them.


1012 Upakkilesa Sutta: Sutta 128


iii 158


If they are too heavy for him, he calls someone else by a signal
of the hand and they move it by joining hands, but because of
this we do not break out into speech. But every five days we sit
together all night discussing the Dhamma. That is how we abide
diligent, ardent, and resolute."

15. "Good, good, Anuruddha. But while you abide thus dili-
gent, ardent, and resolute, have you attained any superhuman
states, a distinction in knowledge and vision worthy of the noble
ones, a comfortable abiding?"

"Venerable sir, as we abide here diligent, ardent, and resolute,
we perceive both light and a vision of forms. 1189 Soon afterwards
the light and the vision of forms disappear, but we have not dis-
covered the cause for that."

16. "You should discover the cause for that, 1190 Anuruddha.
Before my enlightenment, while 1 was still only an unenlight-
ened Bodhisatta, I too perceived both light and a vision of
forms. Soon afterwards the light [158] and the vision of forms
disappeared. I thought: 'What is the cause and condition why the
light and the vision of forms have disappeared?' Then I consid-
ered thus: 'Doubt arose in me, and because of the doubt my con-
centration fell away; when my concentration fell away, the light
and the vision of forms disappeared. I shall so act that doubt
will not arise in me again. '

17. "As, Anuruddha, I was abiding diligent, ardent, and res-
olute, I perceived both light and a vision of forms. Soon afterward
the light and the vision of forms disappeared. 1 thought: 'What is
the cause and condition why the light and the vision of forms
have disappeared?' Then I considered thus: 'Inattention arose in
me, and because of inattention my concentration fell away;
when my concentration fell away, the light and the vision of
forms disappeared. I shall so act that neither doubt nor inatten-
tion will arise in me again.'

18. "As, Anuruddha, I was abiding diligent... I considered
thus: 'Sloth and torpor arose in me, and because of sloth and tor-
por my concentration fell away; when my concentration fell
away, the light and the vision of forms disappeared. I shall so
act that neither doubt nor inattention nor sloth and torpor will
arise in me again.'

19. "As, Anuruddha, I was abiding diligent...! considered
thus: 'Fear arose in me, and because of fear my concentration


iii 160


Imperfections 1013


fell away; when my concentration fell away, the light and the
vision of forms disappeared.' Suppose a man set out on a jour-
ney and murderers leaped out on both sides of him; then fear
would arise in him because of that. So too, fear arose in me. . .the
light and the vision of forms disappeared. [I considered thus:] 'I
shall so act [159] that neither doubt nor inattention nor sloth and
torpor nor fear will arise in me again.'

20. "As, Anuruddha, I was abiding diligent... I considered
thus: 'Elation arose in me, and because of elation my concentra-
tion fell away; when my concentration fell away, the light and
the vision of forms disappeared.' Suppose a man seeking one
entrance to a hidden treasure came all at once upon five
entrances to a hidden treasure; 1191 then elation would arise in
him because of that. So too, elation arose in me... the light and
the vision of forms disappeared. [I considered thus:] 'I shall so
act that neither doubt nor inattention... nor fear nor elation will
arise in me again.'

21. "As, Anuruddha, I was abiding diligent... I considered
thus: 'Inertia arose in me, and because of inertia my concentra-
tion fell away; when my concentration fell away, the light and
the vision of forms disappeared. I shall so act that neither doubt
nor inattention. . .nor elation nor inertia will arise in me again.'

22. "As, Anuruddha, I was abiding diligent... I considered
thus: 'Excess of energy arose in me, and because of excess of
energy my concentration fell away; when my concentration fell
away, the light and the vision of forms disappeared.' Suppose a
man were to grip a quail tightly with both hands; it would die
then and there. So too, an excess of energy arose in me... the
light and the vision of forms disappeared. [I considered thus:] 'I
shall so act that neither doubt nor inattention... nor inertia nor
excess of energy will arise in me again.'

23. "As, Anuruddha, I was abiding diligent... I considered
thus: 'Deficiency of energy arose in me, [160] and because of
deficiency of energy my concentration fell away; when my con-
centration fell away, the light and the vision of forms disap-
peared.' Suppose a man were to grip a quail loosely; it would fly
out of his hands. So too, a deficiency of energy arose in me... the
light and the vision of forms disappeared. [I considered thus:] 'I
shall so act that neither doubt nor inattention... nor excess of
energy nor deficiency of energy will arise in me again.'


iii 161


1014 Upakkilesa Sutta: Sutta 128


24. "As, Anuruddha, I was abiding diligent... I considered
thus: 'Longing arose in me, and because of that longing my con-
centration fell away; when my concentration fell away, the light
and the vision of forms disappeared. I shall so act that neither
doubt nor inattention. ..nor deficiency of energy nor longing will
arise in me again.'

25. "As, Anuruddha, I was abiding diligent... I considered
thus: 'Perception of diversity arose in me, 1192 and because of
perception of diversity my concentration fell away; when my
concentration fell away, the light and the vision of forms disap-
peared. I shall so act that neither doubt nor inattention... nor
longing nor perception of diversity will arise in me again.'

26. "As, Anuruddha, I was abiding diligent... I considered
thus: 'Excessive meditation upon forms arose in me, 1193 and
because of excessive meditation upon forms my concentration
fell away; when my concentration fell away, the light and the
vision of forms disappeared. I shall so act that neither doubt nor
inattention... nor perception of diversity nor excessive medita-
tion upon forms will arise in me again.'

27. "When, Anuruddha, I understood that doubt is an imper-
fection of the mind, 1194 I abandoned doubt, an imperfection of
the mind. When I understood that inattention... sloth and tor-
por. ..fear. ..elation. ..inertia. ..excess of energy... deficiency of
energy... longing... perception of diversity... excessive meditation
upon forms [161] is an imperfection of the mind, I abandoned
excessive meditation upon forms, an imperfection of the mind.

28. "As, Anuruddha, I was abiding diligent, ardent, and res-
olute, I perceived light but I did not see forms; I saw forms but I
did not perceive light, even for a whole night or a whole day or
a whole day and night. I thought: 'What is the cause and condi-
tion for this?' Then I considered thus: 'On the occasion when I
do not attend to the sign of forms but attend to the sign of light,
I then perceive light but do not see forms. On the occasion when
I do not attend to the sign of light but attend to the sign of
forms, I then see forms but do not perceive light, even for a
whole night or a whole day or a whole day and night.'

29. "As, Anuruddha, I was abiding diligent, ardent, and res-
olute, I perceived limited light and saw limited forms; I per-
ceived immeasurable light and saw immeasurable forms, even
for a whole night or a whole day or a whole day and night. I


iii 162


Imperfections 1015


thought: 'What is the cause and condition for this?' Then I con-
sidered thus: 'On the occasion when concentration is limited,
my vision is limited, and with limited vision I perceive limited
light and limited forms. But on the occasion when concentration
is immeasurable, my vision is immeasurable, and with immea-
surable vision I perceive immeasurable light and see immeasur-
able forms, even for a whole night or a whole day or a whole
day and night.'

30. "When, [162] Anuruddha, I understood that doubt is an
imperfection of the mind and had abandoned doubt, an imper-
fection of the mind; when I understood that inattention is an
imperfection of the mind and had abandoned inattention...
abandoned sloth and torpor... abandoned fear... abandoned ela-
tion... abandoned inertia... abandoned excess of energy... aban-
doned deficiency of energy... abandoned longing... abandoned
perception of diversity... abandoned excessive meditation upon
forms, an imperfection of the mind; then I thought: 'I have aban-
doned those imperfections of the mind. Let me now develop
concentration in three ways.' 1195

31. "Thereupon, Anuruddha, I developed concentration with
applied thought and sustained thought; I developed concentra-
tion without applied thought but with sustained thought only; I
developed concentration without applied thought and without
sustained thought; I developed concentration with rapture; I
developed concentration without rapture; I developed concen-
tration accompanied by enjoyment; I developed concentration
accompanied by equanimity. 1196

32. "When, Anuruddha, I had developed concentration with
applied thought and sustained thought... when I had developed
concentration accompanied by equanimity, the knowledge and
vision arose in me: 'My deliverance is unshakeable; this is my
last birth; now there is no renewal of being.'" 1197

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Anuruddha
was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.



129 Balapandita Sutta
Fools and Wise Men


[163] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One
was living at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.
There he addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." -
"Venerable sir," they replied. The Blessed One said this:

(the fool)

2. "Bhikkhus, there are these three characteristics of a fool, signs
of a fool, attributes of a fool. What three? Here a fool is one who
thinks bad thoughts, speaks bad words, and does bad deeds. If a
fool were not so, how would the wise know him thus: 'This per-
son is a fool, an untrue man'? But because a fool is one who
thinks bad thoughts, speaks bad words, and does bad deeds, the
wise know him thus: 'This person is a fool, an untrue man.'

3. "A fool feels pain and grief here and now in three ways. If a
fool is seated in an assembly or along a street or in a square and
people there are discussing certain pertinent and relevant mat-
ters, then, if the fool is one who kills living beings, takes what is
not given, misconducts himself in sensual pleasures, speaks
falsehood, and indulges in wine, liquor, and intoxicants, which
are the basis of negligence, he thinks: 'These people are dis-
cussing certain pertinent and relevant matters; these things are
found in me, and I am seen engaging in those things.' This is the
first kind of pain and grief that a fool feels here and now.

4. "Again, when a robber culprit is caught, a fool sees kings
having many kinds of torture inflicted on him: 1198 [164] having
him flogged with whips, beaten with canes, beaten with clubs;
having his hands cut off, his feet cut off, his hands and feet cut
off; his ears cut off, his nose cut off, his ears and nose cut off;
having him subjected to the 'porridge pot/ to the 'polished-shell


1016


iii 165


Fools and Wise Men 1017


shave/ to the 'Rahu's mouth/ to the 'fiery wreath/ to the
'flaming hand/ to the 'blades of grass/ to the 'bark dress/ to
the 'antelope/ to the 'meat hooks/ to the 'coins/ to the 'lye
pickling/ to the 'pivoting pin/ to the 'rolled-up palliasse'; and
having him splashed with boiling oil, and having him thrown
to be devoured by dogs, and having him impaled alive on
stakes, and having his head cut off with a sword. Then the fool
thinks thus: 'Because of such evil actions as those, when a rob-
ber culprit is caught, kings have many kinds of tortures inflicted
on him: they have him flogged with whips... and have his head
cut off with a sword. Those things are found in me, and I am
seen engaging in those things.' This is the second kind of pain
and grief that a fool feels here and now.

5. "Again, when a fool is on his chair or on his bed or resting on
the ground, then the evil actions that he did in the past - his bodi-
ly, verbal, and mental misconduct - cover him, overspread him,
and envelop him. Just as the shadow of a great mountain peak in
the evening covers, overspreads, and envelops the earth, so too,
when a fool is on his chair or on his bed or resting on the ground,
[165] then the evil actions that he did in the past - his bodily, ver-
bal, and mental misconduct - cover him, overspread him, and
envelop him. Then the fool thinks: 'I have not done what is good,
I have not done what is wholesome, I have not made myself a
shelter from anguish. I have done what is evil, I have done what
is cruel, I have done what is wicked. When I pass away, I shall go
to the destination of those who have not done what is good. . .who
have done what is wicked.' He sorrows, grieves, and laments, he
weeps beating his breast and becomes distraught. This is the
third kind of pain and grief that a fool feels here and now.

6. "A fool who has given himself over to misconduct of body,
speech, and mind, on the dissolution of the body, after death,
reappears in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination,
even in hell.

(hell)

7. "Were it rightly speaking to be said of anything: 'That is utter-
ly unwished for, utterly undesired, utterly disagreeable,' it is of
hell that, rightly speaking, this should be said, so much so that it
is hard to find a simile for the suffering in hell."



iii 166


1018 Balapandita Sutta: Sutta 129


When this was said, a bhikkhu asked the Blessed One: "But,
venerable sir, can a simile be given?"

8. "It can, bhikkhu," the Blessed One said. 1199 "Bhikkhus, sup-
pose men caught a robber culprit and presented him to the king,
saying: 'Sire, here is a robber culprit. Order what punishment
you will for him.' Then the king said: 'Go and strike this man in
the morning with a hundred spears.' And they struck him in the
morning with a hundred spears. Then at noon the king asked:
'How is that man?' - 'Sire, he is still alive.' Then the king said:
'Go and strike that man at noon with a hundred spears.' And
they struck him at noon with a hundred spears. Then in the
evening the king asked: 'How is that man?' - 'Sire, he is still
alive.' Then the king said: 'Go and strike that man in the
evening with a hundred spears.' And they struck him in the
evening with a hundred spears. [166] What do you think,
bhikkhus? Would that man experience pain and grief because of
being struck with the three hundred spears?"

"Venerable sir, that man would experience pain and grief
because of being struck with even one spear, let alone three
hundred."

9. Then, taking a small stone the size of his hand, the Blessed
One addressed the bhikkhus thus: "What do you think,
bhikkhus? Which is the greater, this small stone that I have
taken, the size of my hand, or Himalaya, the king of mountains?"

"Venerable sir, the small stone that the Blessed One has taken,
the size of his hand, does not count beside Himalaya, the king of
mountains; it is not even a fraction, there is no comparison."

"So too, bhikkhus, the pain and grief that the man would
experience because of being struck with the three hundred
spears does not count beside the suffering of hell; it is not even a
fraction, there is no comparison.

10. "Now the wardens of hell torture him with the fivefold
transfixing. They drive a red-hot iron stake through one hand,
they drive a red-hot iron stake through the other hand, they
drive a red-hot iron stake through one foot, they drive a red-hot
iron stake through the other foot, they drive a red-hot iron stake
through his belly. There he feels painful, racking, piercing feel-
ings. Yet he does not die so long as that evil action has not
exhausted its result.

11. "Next the wardens of hell throw him down and pare him
with axes. There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings.


iii 167


Fools and Wise Men 1019


Yet he does not die so long as that evil action has not exhaust-
ed its result.

12. "Next the wardens of hell set him with his feet up and his
head down and pare him with adzes. There he feels painful,
racking, piercing feelings. Yet he does not die so long as that evil
action has not exhausted its result.

13. "Next the wardens of hell harness him to a chariot and
drive him back and forth across burning ground, blazing, and
glowing. [167] There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings.
Yet he does not die so long as that evil action has not exhausted
its result.

14. "Next the wardens of hell make him climb up and down a
great mound of burning coals, blazing, and glowing. There he
feels painful, racking, piercing feelings. Yet he does not die so
long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.

15. "Next the wardens of hell take him feet up and head down
and plunge him into a red-hot metal cauldron, burning, blazing,
and glowing. He is cooked there in a swirl of froth. And as he is
being cooked there in a swirl of froth, he is swept now up, now
down, and now across. There he feels painful, racking, piercing
feelings. Yet he does not die so long as that evil action has not
exhausted its result.

16. "Next the wardens of hell throw him into the Great Hell.
Now as to that Great Hell, bhikkhus:

It has four corners and is built
With four doors, one set in each side.

Walled up with iron and all around
And shut in with an iron roof.

Its floor as well is made of iron
And heated till it glows with fire.

The range is a full hundred leagues
Which it covers all-pervasively.

17. "Bhikkhus, I could tell you in many ways about hell. 1200 So
much so that it is hard to find a simile for the suffering in hell.

(the animal kingdom)

18. "Bhikkhus, there are animals that feed on grass. They eat by
cropping fresh or dried grass with their teeth. And what animals


iii 169


1020 Balapandiia Sutta: Sutta 129


feed on grass? Elephants, horses, cattle, donkeys, goats, and deer,
and any other such animals. A fool who formerly delighted in
tastes here and did evil actions here, on the dissolution of the
body, after death, reappears in the company of animals that feed
on grass.

19. "There are animals that feed on dung. They smell dung
from a distance and run to it, thinking: 'We can eat, we can eat!'
Just as brahmins run to the smell of a sacrifice, thinking: 'We can
eat, we can eat!' so too these animals that feed on dung [168]
smell dung from a distance and run to it, thinking: 'We can eat,
we can eat!' And what animals feed on dung? Fowls, pigs, dogs,
and jackals, and any other such animals. A fool who formerly
delighted in tastes here and did evil actions here, on the dissolu-
tion of the body, after death, reappears in the company of ani-
mals that feed on dung.

20. "There are animals that are born, age, and die in darkness.
And what animals are born, age, and die in darkness? Moths,
maggots, and earthworms, and any other such animals. A fool
who formerly delighted in tastes here and did evil actions here,
on the dissolution of the body, after death, reappears in the
company of animals that are born, age, and die in darkness.

21. "There are animals that are born, age, and die in water.
And what animals are born, age, and die in water? Fish, turtles,
and crocodiles, and any other such animals. A fool who formerly
delighted in tastes here and did evil actions here, on the dissolu-
tion of the body, after death, reappears in the company of ani-
mals that are bom, age, and die in water.

22. "There are animals that are bom, age, and die in filth. And
what animals are bom, age, and die in filth? Those animals that
are born, age, and die in a rotten fish or in a rotten corpse or in
rotten dough or in a cesspit or in a sewer. [169] A fool who for-
merly delighted in tastes here and did evil actions here, on the
dissolution of the body, after death, reappears in the company
of animals that are born, age, and die in filth.

23. "Bhikkhus, I could tell you in many ways about the animal
kingdom, so much so that it is hard to find a simile for the suf-
fering in the animal kingdom.

24. "Suppose a man threw into the sea a yoke with one hole in
it, and the east wind carried it to the west, and the west wind
carried it to the east, and the north wind carried it to the south,


iii 170


Fools and Wise Men 1021


and the south wind carried it to the north. Suppose there were a
blind turtle that came up once at the end of each century. What
do you think, bhikkhus? Would that blind turtle put his neck
into that yoke with one hole in it?"

"He might, venerable sir, sometime or other at the end of a
long period."

"Bhikkhus, the blind turtle would take less time to put his
neck into that yoke with a single hole in it than a fool, once gone
to perdition, would take to regain the human state, I say. Why is
that? Because there is no practising of the Dhamma there, no
practising of what is righteous, no doing of what is wholesome,
no performance of merit. There mutual devouring prevails, and
the slaughter of the weak.

25. "If, sometime or other, at the end of a long period, that fool
comes back to the human state, it is into a low family that he is
reborn - into a family of outcasts or hunters or bamboo-workers
or cartwrights or scavengers - one that is poor with little to eat
and drink, surviving with difficulty, where he scarcely finds
food and clothing; and he is ugly, unsightly, and misshapen,
sickly, blind, cripple-handed, lame, or paralysed; he gets no
food, drink, clothes, [170] vehicles, garlands, scents and
unguents, bed, lodging, and light; he misconducts himself in
body, speech, arid mind, and having done that, on the dissolu-
tion of the body, after death, he reappears in a state of depriva-
tion, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell.

26. "Bhikkhus, suppose a gambler at the very first unlucky
throw loses his child and his wife and all his property and fur-
thermore goes into bondage himself, yet an unlucky throw such
as that is negligible; it is a far more unlucky throw when a fool
who misconducts himself in body, speech, and mind, on the dis-
solution of the body, after death, reappears in a state of depriva-
tion, in an unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell. This
is the complete perfection of the fool's grade. 1201

(the wise man)

27. "Bhikkhus, there are these three characteristics of a wise
man, signs of a wise man, attributes of a wise man. What three?
Here a wise man is one who thinks good thoughts, speaks good
words, and does good deeds. If a wise man were not so, how


1022 Balapandita Sutta: Sutta 129


iii 172


would the wise know him thus: 'This person is a wise man, a
true man'? But because a wise man is one who thinks good
thoughts, speaks good words, and does good deeds, the wise
know him thus: 'This person is a wise man, a true man.'

28. "A wise man feels pleasure and joy here and now in three
ways. If a wise man is seated in an assembly or along a street or
in a square and people there are discussing certain pertinent and
relevant matters, then, if the wise man is one who abstains from
killing living beings, from taking what is not given, from mis-
conduct in sensual pleasures, [171] from false speech, from
wine, liquor, and intoxicants, which are the basis of negligence,
he thinks: 'These people are discussing certain pertinent and rel-
evant matters; those things are not found in me, and I am not
seen engaging in them.' 1202 This is the first kind of pleasure and
joy that a wise man feels here and now.

29. "Again, when a robber culprit is caught, a wise man sees
kings having many kinds of torture inflicted on him... (as in
§4 )... Then the wise man thinks thus: 'Because of such evil actions
as those, when a robber culprit is caught, kings have many kinds
of tortures inflicted on him. Those things are not found in me,
and I am not seen engaging in those things.' This is the second
kind of pleasure and joy that a wise man feels here and now.

30. "Again, when a wise man is on his chair or on his bed or
resting on the ground, then the good actions that he did in the
past - his good bodily, verbal, and mental conduct - cover him,
overspread him, and envelop him. Just as the shadow of a great
mountain peak in the evening covers, overspreads, and
envelops the earth, so too, when a wise man is on his chair or on
his bed or resting on the ground, then the good actions that he
did in the past - his good bodily, verbal, and mental conduct -
cover him, overspread him, and envelop him. Then the wise
man thinks: 'I have not done what is evil, I have not done what
is cruel, I have not done what is wicked. I have done what is
good, I have done what is wholesome, I have made myself a
shelter from anguish. When I pass away, I shall go to the desti-
nation of those who have not done what is evil... who have
made themselves a shelter from anguish.' He does not sorrow,
grieve, and lament, he does not weep beating his breast and
become distraught. This is the third kind of pleasure and joy
that a wise man feels here and now.


iii 173


Fools and Wise Men 1023


31. "A wise man who has given himself over to good conduct
of body, speech, and mind, [172] on the dissolution of the body,
after death, reappears in a happy destination, even in heaven.

(heaven)

32. "Were it rightly speaking to be said of anything: 'That is
utterly wished for, utterly desired, utterly agreeable,' it is of
heaven that, rightly speaking, this should be said, so much so
that it is hard to find a simile for the happiness of heaven."

When this was said, a bhikkhu asked the Blessed One: "But,
venerable sir, can a simile be given?"

33. "It can, bhikkhu," the Blessed One said. "Bhikkhus, sup-
pose that a Wheel-turning Monarch 1203 possessed the seven trea-
sures and the four kinds of success, and because of that experi-
enced pleasure and joy.

34. "What are the seven treasures? Here, when a head-anoint-
ed noble king has bathed his head on the Uposatha day of the
fifteenth 1204 and has ascended to the upper palace chamber for
the Uposatha, there appears to him the divine wheel-treasure
with its thousand spokes, its tire, and its nave, complete in every
aspect. On seeing it, the head-anointed noble king thinks thus:
'Now it has been heard by me that when a head-anointed noble
king has bathed his head on the Uposatha day of the fifteenth
and has ascended to the upper palace chamber for the Uposatha,
and there appears to him the divine wheel-treasure with its
thousand spokes, its tire, and its nave, complete in every aspect,
then that king becomes a Wheel-turning Monarch. Am I then a
Wheel-turning Monarch?'

35. "Then the head-anointed noble king rises from his seat,
and taking a water vessel in his left hand, he sprinkles the
wheel-treasure with his right hand, saying: 'Turn forward, good
wheel-treasure; triumph, good wheel- treasure!' Then the wheel-
treasure turns forward rolling in the eastern direction and the
Wheel-turning Monarch follows it with his four-constituent army.
Now in whatever region the wheel-treasure pauses, there the
Wheel-turning Monarch takes up his abode with his four-con-
stituent army. And [173] opposing kings in the eastern direction
come to the Wheel-turning Monarch and speak thus: 'Come, great
king; welcome, great king; command, great king; advise, great


iii 174


1024 Balapandita Sutta: Sutta 129


king.' The Wheel-turning Monarch speaks thus: 'You should not
kill living beings; you should not take what has not been given;
you should not misconduct yourselves in sensual pleasures; you
should not speak falsehood; you should not drink intoxicants;
you should eat what you are accustomed to eat.' And the oppos-
ing kings in the eastern direction submit to the Wheel-turning
Monarch.

"Then the wheel-treasure plunges into the eastern ocean and
emerges again. And then it turns forward rolling in the southern
direction... And the opposing kings in the southern direction
submit to the Wheel-turning Monarch. Then the wheel-treasure
plunges into the southern ocean and emerges again. And then it
turns forward rolling in the western direction... And the oppos-
ing kings in the western direction submit to the Wheel-turning
Monarch. Then the wheel-treasure plunges into the western
ocean and emerges again. And then it turns forward rolling in
the northern direction... And the opposing kings in the northern
direction submit to the Wheel-turning Monarch.

"Now when the wheel-treasure has triumphed over the earth to
the ocean's edge, it returns to the royal capital and remains as if
fixed on its axle at the gate of the Wheel-turning Monarch's inner
palace, as an adornment to the gate of his inner palace. Such is
the wheel-treasure that appears to a Wheel-turning Monarch.

36. "Again, the elephant-treasure appears to the Wheel-turning
Monarch, all white, with sevenfold stance, with supernormal
power, flying through the air, the king of elephants named
'Uposatha.' On seeing him, the Wheel-turning Monarch's mind
has confidence in him thus: 'It would be wonderful to ride the
elephant, if he would undergo taming!' Then the elephant-trea-
sure [174] undergoes taming just like a fine thoroughbred ele-
phant well tamed for a long time. And it so happens that the
Wheel-turning Monarch, when testing the elephant-treasure,
mounts him in the morning, and after traversing the whole
earth to the edge of the ocean, he returns to the royal capital to
take his morning meal. Such is the elephant-treasure that
appears to a Wheel-turning Monarch.

37. "Again, the horse-treasure appears to the Wheel-turning
Monarch, all white, with raven-black head, with mane like muhja
grass, with supernormal power, flying through the air, the king
of horses named 'Valahaka' ['Thundercloud']. On seeing him,


iii 175


Fools and Wise Men 1025


the Wheel-turning Monarch's mind has confidence in him thus:
'It would be wonderful to ride the horse, if he would undergo
taming!' Then the horse-treasure undergoes taming just like a
fine thoroughbred horse well tamed for a long time. And it so
happens that the Wheel-turning Monarch, when testing the
horse-treasure, mounts him in the morning, and after traversing
the whole earth to the edge of the ocean, he returns to the royal
capital to take his morning meal. Such is the horse-treasure that
appears to a Wheel-turning Monarch.

38. "Again, the jewel-treasure appears to the Wheel-turning
Monarch. The jewel is fine beryl of purest water, eight-faceted,
and well cut. Now the radiance of the jewel-treasure spreads
around for a whole league. And it so happens that when the
Wheel-turning Monarch is testing the jewel-treasure, he draws
up his four-constituent army in array, and mounting the jewel
on top of his banner, he sets forth in the darkness and gloom of
the night. Then all the [inhabitants of the] villages nearby begin
their work by its light, thinking that it is day. Such is the jewel-
treasure that appears to a Wheel-turning Monarch.

39. "Again, the woman-treasure appears to the Wheel-turning
Monarch, beautiful, comely and graceful, possessing the
supreme beauty of complexion, neither too tall nor too short,
[175] neither too slim nor too stout, neither too dark nor too fair,
surpassing human beauty without reaching divine beauty. The
touch of the woman-treasure is such that it is like a tuft of kapok
or a tuft of cotton-wool. When it is cool, her limbs are warm;
when it is warm, her limbs are cool. From her body the scent of
sandalwood comes forth, and from her mouth the scent of lotus-
es. She rises before the Wheel-turning Monarch and retires after
him. She is eager to serve, agreeable in conduct, and sweet in
speech. Since she is never unfaithful to the Wheel-turning
Monarch even in thought, how could she be so in body? Such is
the woman-treasure that appears to a Wheel-turning Monarch.

40. "Again, the steward-treasure appears to the Wheel-turning
Monarch. The divine eye bom of past action is manifested in
him whereby he sees hidden stores of treasure both with owners
and ownerless. He approaches the Wheel-turning Monarch and
says: 'Sire, you remain at ease. I shall take care of your monetary
affairs.' And it so happens that when the Wheel-turning
Monarch is testing the steward-treasure, he boards a boat, and


iii 176


1026 Balapandita Sutta: Sutta 129


putting out into the river Ganges, in midstream he tells the
steward-treasure: 'I need gold and bullion, steward.' - 'Then,
sire, let the boat be steered towards one bank.' - 'Steward, it is
actually here that I need gold and bullion.' Then the steward-
treasure plunges both hands into the water and draws up a pot
full of gold and bullion, and he tells the Wheel-turning Monarch:
'Is this enough, sire? Is enough done, enough offered?' - 'This is
enough, steward, enough is done, enough offered.' Such is the
steward-treasure that appears to a Wheel-turning Monarch.

41. "Again, the counsellor-treasure appears [176] to the
Wheel-turning Monarch, wise, shrewd, and sagacious, capable
of getting the Wheel-turning Monarch to promote that which is
worthy of being promoted, to dismiss that which should be dis-
missed, and to establish that which should be established. He
approaches the Wheel-turning Monarch and says: 'Sire, you
remain at ease. I shall govern.' Such is the counsellor-treasure
that appears to a Wheel-turning Monarch.

"These are the seven treasures that a Wheel-turning Monarch
possesses.

42. "What are the four kinds of success? Here a Wheel-turning
Monarch is handsome, comely, and graceful, possessing the
supreme beauty of complexion, and he surpasses other human
beings in that respect. This is the first kind of success that a
Wheel-turning Monarch possesses.

43. "Again, a Wheel-turning Monarch lives long and endures
long, and he surpasses t>ther human beings in that respect. This
is the second kind of success that a Wheel-turning Monarch
possesses.

44. "Again, a Wheel-turning Monarch is free from illness and
affliction, possessing a good digestion that is neither too cool
nor too warm, and he surpasses other human beings in that
respect. This is the third kind of success that a Wheel-turning
Monarch possesses.

45. "Again, a Wheel-turning Monarch is dear and agreeable to
brahmins and householders. Just as a father is dear and agree-
able to his children, so too a Wheel-turning Monarch is dear and
agreeable to brahmins and householders. Brahmins and house-
holders, too, are dear and agreeable to a Wheel-turning
Monarch. Just as children are dear and agreeable to a father, so
too brahmins and householders are dear and agreeable to a


iii 178


Fools and Wise Men 1027


Wheel-turning Monarch. Once a Wheel-turning Monarch was
driving in a pleasure park with his four-constituent army. Then
brahmins and householders went to him and spoke thus: 'Sire,
drive slowly that we may see you longer.' And so he told his
charioteer: [177] 'Charioteer, drive slowly that I may see the
brahmins and householders longer.' This is the fourth kind of
success that a Wheel-turning Monarch possesses.

"These are the four kinds of success that a Wheel-turning
Monarch possesses.

46. "What do you think, bhikkhus? Would a Wheel-turning
Monarch experience pleasure and joy because of possessing
these seven treasures and these four kinds of success?"

"Venerable sir, a Wheel-turning Monarch would experience
pleasure and joy because of possessing even one treasure, let
alone seven treasures and four kinds of success."

47. Then, taking a small stone the size of his hand, the Blessed
One addressed the bhikkhus thus: "What do you think,
bhikkhus? Which is the greater, this small stone that I have
taken, the size of my hand, or Himalaya, the king of mountains?"

"Venerable sir, the small stone that the Blessed One has taken,
the size of his hand, does not count beside Himalaya, the king of
mountains; it is not even a fraction, there is no comparison."

"So too, bhikkhus, the pleasure and joy that a Wheel-turning
Monarch would experience because of possessing the seven
treasures and the four kinds of success does not count beside
the happiness of heaven; it is not even a fraction, there is no
comparison.

48. "If, some time or other, at the end of a long period, the
wise man comes back to the human state, it is into a high family
that he is reborn - into a family of well-to-do nobles, or well-to-
do brahmins, or well-to-do householders - one that is rich, -of
great wealth, of great possessions, with abundant gold and silver,
with abundant assets and means, and with abundant money and
grain. He is handsome, comely and graceful, possessing the
supreme beauty of complexion. He obtains food and drink,
clothes, vehicles, garlands, scents and unguents, bed, lodging,
and light. He conducts himself well in body, speech, and mind,
[178] and having done so, on the dissolution of the body, after
death, he reappears in a happy destination, even in the heavenly
world.


iii 178


1028 Balapandita Sutta: Sutta 129


49. "Bhikkhus, suppose a gambler at the very first lucky throw
won a great fortune, yet a lucky throw such as that is negligible;
it is a far more lucky throw when a wise man who conducts
himself well in body, speech, and mind, on the dissolution of
the body, after death, reappears in a happy destination, even in
the heavenly world. 1205 This is the complete perfection of the
wise man's grade."

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


130 Devaduta Sutta
The Divine Messengers


1, Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There he
addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, suppose there were two houses with doors and
a man with good sight standing there between them saw people
going in and coming out and passing to and fro. So too, with the
divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human, I see
beings passing away and reappearing, inferior and superior, fair
and ugly, fortunate and unfortunate. I understand how beings
pass on according to their actions thus: 'These worthy beings
who were well-conducted in body, speech, and mind, not revilers
of noble ones, right in their views, giving effect to right views in
their actions, on the dissolution of the body, after death, have
reappeared in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.
Or these worthy beings who were well-conducted in body,
speech, and mind, not [179] revilers of noble ones, right in their
views, giving effect to right views in their actions, on the disso-
lution of the body, after death, have reappeared among human
beings. But these worthy beings who were ill-conducted in
body, speech, and mind, revilers of noble ones, wrong in their
views, giving effect to wrong views in their actions, on the dis-
solution of the body, after death, have reappeared in the realm
of ghosts. Or these worthy beings who were ill-conducted... on
the dissolution of the body, after death, have reappeared in the
animal world. Or these worthy beings who were ill-
conducted... on the dissolution of the body, after death, have
reappeared in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination,
in perdition, even in hell.'


1029


iii 180


1030 Devaduta Sutta: Sutta 130


3. "Now the wardens of hell seize such a being by the arms
and present him to King Yama, 1206 saying: 'Sire, this man has ill-
treated his mother, ill-treated his father, ill-treated recluses, ill-
treated brahmins; he has had no respect for the elders of his
clan. Let the king order his punishment.'

4. "Then King Yama presses and questions and cross-questions
him about the first divine messenger: 'Good man, did you not
see the first divine messenger to appear in the world?' 1207 He
says: 'I did not, venerable sir.' Then King Yama says: 'Good
man, have you never seen in the world a young tender infant
lying prone, fouled in his own excrement and urine?' He says: 'I
have, venerable sir.'

"Then King Yama says: 'Good man, did it never occur to you

- an intelligent and mature man - "I too am subject to birth, I
am not exempt from birth: surely I had better do good by body,
speech, and mind"?' He says: 'I was unable, venerable sir, I was
negligent.' Then King Yama says: 'Good man, through negli-
gence you have failed to do good by body, speech, and mind.
Certainly they will deal with you according to your negligence.
But this evil action of yours was not done by your mother or
your father, [180] or by your brother or your sister, or by your
friends and companions, or by your kinsmen and relatives, or
by recluses and brahmins, or by gods: this evil action was done
by you yourself, and you yourself will experience its result.'

5. "Then, after pressing and questioning and cross-questioning
him about the first divine messenger. King Yama presses and
questions and cross-questions him about the second divine mes-
senger: 'Good man, did you not see the second divine messen-
ger to appear in the world?' He says: 'I did not, venerable sir.'
Then King Yama says: 'Good man, have you never seen in the
world a man - or a woman - at eighty, ninety, or a hundred
years, aged, as crooked as a roof bracket, doubled up, supported
by a walking stick, tottering, frail, youth gone, teeth broken,
grey-haired, scanty-haired, bald, wrinkled, with limbs all
blotchy?' He says: 'I have, venerable sir.'

"Then King Yama says: 'Good man, did it never occur to you

- an intelligent and mature man - "I too am subject to ageing, I
am not exempt from ageing: surely I had better do good by
body, speech, and mind"?' He says: 'I was unable, venerable sir,
I was negligent.' Then King Yama says: 'Good man, through


iii 182


The Divine Messengers 1031


negligence you have failed to do good by body, speech, and
mind. Certainly they will deal with you according to your
negligence. But this evil action of yours was not done by your
mother... or by gods: this evil action was done by you yourself,
and you yourself will experience its result.'

6. "Then, after pressing and questioning and cross-questioning
him about the second divine messenger. King Yama presses and
questions and cross-questions him about the third divine mes-
senger. [181] 'Good man, did you not see the third divine mes-
senger to appear in the world?' He says: T did not, venerable
sir.' Then King Yama says: 'Good man, have you never seen in
the world a man - or a woman - afflicted, suffering, and gravely
ill, lying fouled in his own excrement and urine, lifted up by
some and set down by others?' He says: 'I have, venerable sir.'

"Then King Yama says: 'Good man, did it never occur to you

- an intelligent and mature man - "I too am subject to sickness, I
am not exempt from sickness: surely I had better do good by
body, speech, and mind"?' He says: 'I was unable, venerable sir,
I was negligent.' Then King Yama says: 'Good man, through
negligence you have failed to do good by body, speech, and
mind. Certainly they will deal with you according to your
negligence. But this evil action of yours was not done by your
mother... or by gods: this evil action was done by you yourself,
and you yourself will experience its result.'

7. "Then, after pressing and questioning and cross-questioning
him about the third divine messenger. King Yama presses and
questions and cross-questions him about the fourth divine mes-
senger: 'Good man, did you not see the fourth divine messenger
to appear in the world?' He says: 'I did not, venerable sir.' Then
King Yama says: 'Good man, have you never seen in the world,
when a robber culprit is caught, kings having many kinds of tor-
tures inflicted on him: having him flogged with whips. ..(as
Sutta 129, §4 )... and having his head cut off with a sword?' He
says: 'I have, venerable sir.'

"Then King Yama says: 'Good man, did it never occur to you

- an intelligent and mature man - "Those who do evil actions
have such tortures of various kinds inflicted on them here and
now; [182] so what in the hereafter? Surely I had better do good
by body, speech, and mind"?' He says: T was unable, venerable
sir, I was negligent.' Then King Yama says: 'Good man, through


1032 Devaduta Sutta: Sutta 130


iii 183


negligence you have failed to do good by body, speech, and
mind. Certainly they will deal with you according to your
negligence. But this evil action of yours was not done by your
mother... or by gods: this evil action was done by you yourself,
and you yourself will experience its result.'

8. "Then, after pressing and questioning and cross-questioning
him about the fourth divine messenger. King Yama presses and
questions and cross-questions him about the fifth divine mes-
senger: 'Good man, did you not see the fifth divine messenger to
appear in the world?' He says: 'I did not, venerable sir.' Then
King Yama says: 'Good man, have you never seen in the world a
man - or a woman - one-day dead, two-days dead, three-days
dead, bloated, livid, and oozing with matter?' He says: 'I have,
venerable sir.'

"Then King Yama says: 'Good man, did it never occur to you
- an intelligent and mature man - "I too am subject to death, I
am not exempt from death: surely I had better do good by body,
speech, and mind"?' He says: 'I was unable, venerable sir, I was
negligent.' Then King Yama says: 'Good man, through negli-
gence you have failed to do good by body, speech, and mind.
Certainly they will deal with you according to your negligence.
But this evil action of yours was not done by your mother... or
by gods: this evil action was done by you yourself, and you
yourself will experience its result.'

9. "Then, after pressing and questioning and cross-questioning
him about the fifth divine messenger. King Yama is silent.

10. "Now the wardens of hell [183] torture him with the five-
fold transfixing. 1208 They drive a red-hot iron stake through one
hand, they drive a red-hot iron stake through the other hand,
they drive a red-hot iron stake through one foot, they drive a
red-hot iron stake through the other foot, they drive a red-hot
iron stake through his belly. There he feels painful, racking,
piercing feelings. Yet he does not die so long as that evil action
has not exhausted its result.

11. "Next the wardens of hell throw him down and pare him
with axes. There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings. Yet he
does not die so long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.

12. "Next the wardens of hell set him with his feet up and his
head down and pare him with adzes. There he feels painful.


iii 184


The Divine Messengers 1033


racking, piercing feelings. Yet he does not die so long as that evil
action has not exhausted its result.

13. "Next the wardens of hell harness him to a chariot and drive
him back and forth across burning ground, blazing and glowing.
There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings. Yet he does not
die so long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.

14. "Next the wardens of hell make him climb up and down a
great mound of burning coals, blazing and glowing. There he
feels painful, racking, piercing feelings. Yet he does not die so
long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.

15. "Next the wardens of hell take him feet up and head down
and plunge him into a red-hot metal cauldron, burning, blazing,
and glowing. He is cooked there in a swirl of froth. And as he is
being cooked there in a swirl of froth, he is swept now up, now
down, and now across. There he feels painful, racking, piercing
feelings. Yet he does not die so long as that evil action has not
exhausted its result.

16. "Next the wardens of hell throw him into the Great Hell.
Now as to that Great Hell, bhikkhus:

It has four corners and is built
With four doors, one set in each side.

Walled up with iron all around
And shut in with an iron roof.

Its floor as well is made of iron
And heated till it glows with fire.

The range is a full hundred leagues
Which it covers all-pervasively.

17. "Now the flames that surge out from the Great Hell's
eastern wall dash against its western wall. The flames that surge
out from its western wall dash against [184] its eastern wall. The
flames that surge out from its northern wall dash against its
southern wall. The flames that surge out from its southern wall
dash against its northern wall. The flames that dash out from the
bottom dash against the top. And the flames that surge out from
the top dash against the bottom. There he feels painful, racking,
piercing feelings. Yet he does not die so long as that evil action
has not exhausted its result.



1034 Devaduta Sutta: Sutta 130


iii 185


18. "Some time or other, bhikkhus, at the end of a long period,
there comes an occasion when the Great Hell's eastern door is
opened. He runs towards it, treading quickly. As he does so, his
outer skin burns, his inner skin burns, his flesh burns, his sinews
bum, his bones turn to smoke; and it is the same when his foot
is uplifted. When at long last he reaches the door, then it is shut.
There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings. Yet he does not
die so long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.

"Some time or other, at the end of a long period, there comes
an occasion when the Great Hell's western door is opened...
when its northern door is opened... when its southern door is
opened. He runs towards it, treading quickly... When at long
last he reaches the door, then it is shut. There he feels painful,
racking, piercing feelings. Yet he does not die so long as that evil
action has not exhausted its result.

19. "Some time or other, bhikkhus, at the end of a long period,
there comes an occasion when the Great Hell's eastern door is
opened. He rims towards it, treading quickly. As he does so, his
outer skin bums, his inner skin bums, his flesh bums, his sinews
burn, his bones turn to smoke; and it is the same when his foot
is uplifted. He comes out by that door.

20. "Immediately next to the Great Hell [185] is the vast Hell of
Excrement. He falls into that. In that Hell of Excrement needle-
mouthed creatures bore through his outer skin and bore through
his inner skin and bore through his flesh arid bore through his
sinews and bore through his bones and devour his marrow.
There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings. Yet he does not
die so long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.

21. "Immediately next to the Hell of Excrement is the vast Hell
of Hot Embers. He falls into that. There he feels painful, racking,
piercing feelings. Yet he does not die so long as that evil action
has not exhausted its result.

22. "Immediately next to the Hell of Hot Embers is the vast
Wood of Simbali Trees, a league high, bristling with thorns six-
teen finger-breadths long, burning, blazing, and glowing. They
make him climb up and down those trees. There he feels
painful, racking, piercing feelings. Yet he does not die so long as
that evil action has not exhausted its result.

23. "Immediately next to the Wood of Simbali Trees is a vast
Wood of Sword-leaf Trees. He goes into that. The leaves, stirred


iii 186


The Divine Messengers 1035


by the wind, cut off his hands and cut off his feet and cut off his
hands and feet; they cut off his ears and cut off his nose and cut
off his ears and nose. There he feels painful, racking, piercing
feelings. Yet he does not die so long as that evil action has not
exhausted its result.

24. "Immediately next to the Wood of Sword-leaf Trees is a
great river of caustic water. He falls into that. There he is swept
upstream and he is swept downstream and he is swept
upstream and downstream. There he feels painful, racking,
piercing feelings. Yet he does not die so long as that evil action
has not exhausted its result.

25. "Next the wardens of hell pull him out with a hook, [186]
and setting him on the ground, they ask him: 'Good man, what
do you want?' He says: 'I am hungry, venerable sirs/ Then the
wardens of hell prise open his mouth with red-hot iron tongs,
burning, blazing, and glowing, and they throw into his mouth a
red-hot metal ball, burning, blazing, and glowing. It burns his
lips, it bums his mouth, it bums his throat, it bums his stomach,
and it passes out below carrying with it his large and small
intestines. There he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings. Yet he
does not die so long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.

26. "Next the wardens of hell ask him: 'Good man, what do
you want?' He says: 'I am thirsty, venerable sirs.' Then the war-
dens of hell prise open his mouth with red-hot iron tongs, burn-
ing, blazing, and glowing, and they pour into his mouth molten
copper, burning, blazing, and glowing. It burns his lips, it burns
his mouth, it bums his throat, it bums his stomach, and it passes
out below carrying with it his large and small intestines. There
he feels painful, racking, piercing feelings. Yet he does not die so
long as that evil action has not exhausted its result.

27. "Then the wardens of hell throw him back again into the
Great Hell.

28. "It has happened that King Yama thought: 'Those in the
world who do evil unwholesome actions indeed have all these
many kinds of tortures inflicted on them. Oh, that I might attain
the human state, that a Tathagata, accomplished and fully
enlightened, might appear in the world, that I might wait on
that Blessed One, that the Blessed One might teach me the
Dhamma, and that I might come to understand that Blessed
One's Dhamma!'


1036 Devaduta Sutta: Sutta 130


iii 187


29. "Bhikkhus, I tell you this not as something I heard from
another recluse or brahmin. I tell you this as something that I
have actually known, seen, and discovered by myself." [187]

30. That is what the Blessed One said. When the Sublime One
had said that, the Teacher said further:

"Though warned by the divine messengers.

Full many are the negligent.

And people may sorrow long indeed
Once gone down to the lower world.

But when by the divine messengers
Good people here in this life are warned.

They do not dwell in ignorance
But practise well the noble Dhamma.

Clinging they look upon with fear
For it produces birth and death;

And by not clinging they are freed
In the destruction of birth and death.

They dwell in bliss for they are safe
And reach Nibbana here and now.

They are beyond all fear and hate;

They have escaped all suffering."



4

The Division of Expositions

( Vibhangavagga )






131 Bhaddekaratta Sutta
One Fortunate Attachment


1. Thus have I heard . 1209 On one occasion the Blessed One was
living at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There
he addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, I shall teach you the summary and exposition of
'One Who Has One Fortunate Attachment.' 1210 Listen and attend
closely to what I shall say." - "Yes, venerable sir," the bhikkhus
replied. The Blessed One said this:

3. "Let not a person revive the past
Or on the future build his hopes; 1211
For the past has been left behind
And the future has not been reached.

Instead with insight let him see
Each presently arisen state; 1212

Let him know that and be sure of it.

Invincibly, unshakeably. 1213
Today the effort must be made;

Tomorrow Death may come, who knows?

No bargain with Mortality

Can keep him and his hordes away.

But one who dwells thus ardently.

Relentlessly, by day, by night -

It is he, the Peaceful Sage has said, 1214

Who has one fortunate attachment. [188]

4. "How, bhikkhus, does one revive the past? Thinking, 'I had
such material form in the past,' one finds delight in that. 1215
Thinking, 'I had such feeling in the past,'...! had such percep-
tion in the past,'...'! had such formations in the past,'...'! had


1039


1040 Bhaddekaratta Sutta: Sutta 131


iii 189


such consciousness in the past/ one finds delight in that. That is
how one revives the past.

5. "And how, bhikkhus, does one not revive the past? Think-
ing, 'I had such material form in the past/ one does not find
delight in that. 1216 Thinking, 'I had such feeling in the past/...!
had such perception in the past/... 'I had such formations in the
past/...! had such consciousness in the past/ one does not find
delight in that. That is how one does not revive the past.

6. "And how, bhikkhus, does one build up hope upon the
future? Thinking, 'I may have such material form in the
future/ 1217 one finds delight in that. Thinking, T may have such
feeling in the future/... 'I may have such perception in the
future/... T may have such formations in the future/... 'I may
have such consciousness in the future/ one finds delight in that.
That is how one builds up hope upon the future.

7. "And how, bhikkhus, does one not build up hope upon the
future? Thinking, 'I may have such material form in the future/
one does not find delight in that. Thinking, 'I may have such
feeling in the future, '...'I may have such perception in the
future,'... 'I may have such formations in the future/... 'I may
have such consciousness in the future/ one does not find delight
in that. That is how one does not build up hope upon the future.

8. "And how, bhikkhus, is one vanquished in regard to
presently arisen states? 1218 Here, bhikkhus, an untaught ordi-
nary person, who has no regard for noble ones and is unskilled
and undisciplined in fheir Dhamma, who has no regard for true
men and is unskilled and undisciplined in their Dhamma,
regards material form as self, or self as possessed of material
form, or material form as in self, or self as in material form. He
regards feeling as self... perception as self... formations as self
[189]... consciousness as self, or self as possessed of conscious-
ness, or consciousness as in self, or self as in consciousness. That
is how one is vanquished in regard to presently arisen states.

9. "And how, bhikkhus, is one invincible in regard to presently
arisen states? Here, bhikkhus, a well-taught noble disciple, who
has regard for noble ones and is skilled and disciplined in their
Dhamma, who has regard for true men and is skilled and disci-
plined in their Dhamma, does not regard material form as self,
or self as possessed of material form, or material form as in self,
or self as in material form. He does not regard feeling a s


iii 189


One Fortunate Attachment 1041


self... perception as self... formations as self... consciousness as
self, or self as possessed of consciousness, or consciousness as in
self, or self as in consciousness. That is how one is invincible in
regard to presently arisen states.

10. "Let not a person revive the past. . .

Who has one fortunate attachment.

11. "So it was with reference to this that it was said:
'Bhikkhus, I shall teach you the summary and exposition of
"One Who Has One Fortunate Attachment."'"

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.



132 Anandabhaddekaratta Sutta
Ananda and One Fortunate
Attachment


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Savatthl in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.

2. Now on that occasion the venerable Ananda was instructing,
urging, rousing, and encouraging [190] the bhikkhus with talk on
the Dhamma in the assembly hall. He was reciting the summary
and exposition of "One Who Has One Fortunate Attachment."

Then, in the evening, the Blessed One rose from meditation
and went to the assembly hall. He sat down on a seat made
ready and asked the bhikkhus: "Bhikkhus, who has been
instructing, urging, rousing, and encouraging the bhikkhus with
talk on the Dhamma in the assembly hall? Who has been recit-
ing the summary and exposition of 'One Who has One
Fortunate Attachment'?"

"It was the venerable Ananda, venerable sir."

Then the Blessed One asked the venerable Ananda: "Ananda,
how were you instructing, urging, rousing, and encouraging the
bhikkhus with talk on the Dhamma, and reciting the summary
and exposition of 'One Who Has One Fortunate Attachment'?"

3-10. "I was doing so thus, venerable sir: [191]

'Let not a person revive the past. . .

(Repeat the whole of the last sutta, §§3-10 up to:)

Who has one fortunate attachment.'

11. "I was instructing, urging, rousing, and encouraging the
bhikkhus with talk on the Dhamma thus, and reciting the sum-
mary and exposition of 'One Who Has One Fortunate Attach-
ment' thus."

"Good, good, Ananda! It is good that you were instructing,
urging, rousing, and encouraging the bhikkhus with talk on the


1042


iii 191


Ananda and One Fortunate Attachment 1043


Dhamma thus, and reciting the summary and exposition of 'One
Who Has One Fortunate Attachment' thus:

12-19. "Let not a person revive the past. . .

( Repeat the whole of the last sutta, §§3-10 up to:)

Who has one fortunate attachment."

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Ananda was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


133 Mahakaccanabhaddekaratta Sutta
Maha Kaccana

and One Fortunate Attachment


[192] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One
was living at Rajagaha in the Park of the Hot Springs. Then,
when it was near dawn, the venerable Samiddhi went to the hot
springs to bathe his limbs. After bathing he came up out of the
water and stood dressed in one robe, drying his limbs. Then,
when the night was well advanced, a certain deity of beautiful
appearance who illuminated the whole of the Hot Springs,
approached the venerable Samiddhi. Standing at one side, the
deity said to him:

2. "Bhikkhu, do you remember the summary and exposition
of 'One Who Has One Fortunate Attachment'?"

"Friend, I do not remember the summary and exposition of
'One Who Has One Fortunate Attachment/ But, friend, do you
remember the summary and exposition of 'One Who Has One
Fortunate Attachment'?"

"Bhikkhu, I too do not remember the summary and exposition
of 'One Who Has One Fortunate Attachment.' But, bhikkhu, do
you remember the stanza of 'One Who Has One Fortunate
Attachment'?"

"Friend, I do not remember the stanza of 'One Who Has One
Fortunate Attachment.' But, friend, do you remember the stanza
of 'One Who Has One Fortunate Attachment'?"

"Bhikkhu, I too do not remember the stanza of 'One Who Has
One Fortunate Attachment.' But, bhikkhu, learn the summary
and exposition of 'One Who Has One Fortunate Attachment.'
Bhikkhu, master the summary and exposition of 'One Who Has
One Fortunate Attachment.' Bhikkhu, remember the summary
and exposition of 'One Who Has One Fortunate Attachment.'


1044


iii 194


Maha Kaccana and One Fortunate Attachment 1045


Bhikkhu, the summary and exposition of 'One Who Has One
Fortunate Attachment' is beneficial, it belongs to the fundamen-
tals of the holy life."

That is what was said by the deity, who thereupon vanished
at once.

3. Then, when the night was over, the venerable Samiddhi
went to the Blessed One. After paying homage to him, he sat
down at one side, [193] told the Blessed One ail that had
occurred, and said: "It would be good, venerable sir, if the
Blessed One would teach me the summary and exposition of
'One Who Has One Fortunate Attachment.”'

4. "Then, bhikkhu, listen and attend closely to what I shall
say." - "Yes, venerable sir," the venerable Samiddhi replied. The
Blessed One said:

5. "Let not a person revive the past
Or on the future build his hopes;

For the past has been left behind
And the future has not been reached.

Instead with insight let him see
Each presently arisen state;

Let him know that and be sure of it,

Invincibly, unshakeably.

Today the effort must be made;

Tomorrow Death may come, who knows?

No bargain with Mortality

Can keep him and his hordes away.

But one who dwells thus ardently.

Relentlessly, by day, by night -
It is he, the Peaceful Sage has said.

Who has one fortunate attachment."

6. That is what the Blessed One said. Having said this, the
Sublime One rose from his seat and went into his dwelling.

7. Then, soon after the Blessed One had gone, the bhikkhus
considered: 1219 "Now, friends, the Blessed One has risen from
his seat and gone into his dwelling after giving a summary in
brief without expounding the detailed meaning. Now who will
expound this in detail?" [194] Then they considered: "The vener-
able Maha Kaccana is praised by the Teacher and esteemed by



1046 Mahakaccanabhaddekaratta Sutta: Sutta 133


iii 195


his wise companions in the holy life. He is capable of expound-
ing the detailed meaning. Suppose we went to him and asked
him the meaning of this."

8. Then the bhikkhus went to the venerable Maha Kaccana
and exchanged greetings with him. When this courteous and
amiable talk was finished, they sat down to one side and they
told him what had taken place, adding: "Let the venerable Maha
Kaccana expound it to us."

9. [The venerable Maha Kaccana replied:] "Friends, it is as
though a man needing heartwood, seeking heartwood, wander-
ing in search of heartwood, [195] thought that heartwood
should be sought for among the branches and leaves of a great
tree standing possessed of heartwood, after he had passed over
the root and the trunk. And so it is with you, venerable sirs, that
you think that I should be asked about the meaning of this, after
you passed the Blessed One by when you were face to face with
the Teacher. For knowing, the Blessed One knows; seeing, he
sees; he is vision, he is knowledge, he is the Dhamma, he is the
holy one; he is the sayer, the proclaimer, the elucidator of mean-
ing, the giver of the Deathless, the lord of the Dhamma, the
Tathagata. That was the time when you should have asked the
Blessed One the meaning. As he told you, so you should have
remembered it."

10. "Surely, friend Kaccana, knowing, the Blessed One knows;
seeing, he sees; he is vision... the Tathagata. That was the time
when we should have asked the Blessed One the meaning. As
he told us, so we should have remembered it. Yet the venerable
Maha Kaccana is praised by the Teacher and esteemed by his
wise companions in the holy life. The venerable Maha Kaccana
is capable of expounding the detailed meaning of this summary
given in brief by the Blessed One without expounding the
detailed meaning. Let the venerable Maha Kaccana expound it
without finding it troublesome."

11. "Then listen, friends, and attend closely to what I shall
say." - "Yes, friend," the bhikkhus replied. The venerable Maha
Kaccana said this:

12. "Friends, when the Blessed One rose from his seat and
went into his dwelling after giving a summary in brief without
expounding the detailed meaning, that is:


iii 197


Maha Kaccana and One Fortunate Attachment 1047


'Let not a person revive the past.. .

Who has one fortunate attachment/

I understand the detailed meaning of it to be as follows.

13. "How, friends, does one revive the past? [196] Thinking, 'My
eye was thus in the past and forms were thus/ 1220 one's conscious-
ness becomes bound up with desire and lust for that. Because
one's consciousness is bound up with desire and lust, one
delights in that. When one delights in that, one revives the past.

"Thinking, 'My ear was thus in the past and sounds were
thus. ..My nose and odours. ..My tongue and flavours. ..My
body and tangibles... My mind was thus in the past and mind-
objects were thus/ one's consciousness becomes bound up with
desire and lust for that. Because one's consciousness is bound
up with desire and lust, one delights in that. When one delights
in that, one revives the past. That is how one revives the past.

14. "How does one not revive the past? Thinking, 'My eye was
thus in the past and forms were thus/ one's consciousness does
not become bound up with desire and lust for that. Because
one's consciousness is not bound up with desire and lust, one
does not delight in that. When one does not delight in that, one
does not revive the past.

"Thinking, 'My ear was thus in the past and sounds were
thus. ..My nose and odours. ..My tongue and flavours. ..My
body and tangibles... My mind was thus in the past and mind-
objects were thus,' one's consciousness does not become bound
up with desire and lust for that. Because one's consciousness is
not bound up with desire and lust, one does not delight in that.
When one does not delight in that, one does not revive the past.
That is how one does not revive the past.

15. "How, friends, does one build up hope upon the future?
Thinking, 'My eye may be thus in the future and forms may be
thus/ one sets one's heart on obtaining what has not yet been
obtained. Because one sets one's heart thus, one delights in that.
When one delights in that, one builds up hope upon the future.

"Thinking, 'My ear may be thus in the future and sounds may
be thus... My nose and odours... My tongue and flavours... My
body and tangibles... My mind may be thus in the future and
[197] mind-objects may be thus/ one sets one's heart on obtaining


1048 Mahakaccanabhaddekaratta Sutta: Sutta 133


iii 197


what has not yet been obtained. Because one sets one's heart thus,
one delights in that. When one delights in that, one builds up
hope upon the future. That is how one builds up hope upon the
future.

16. "How, friends, does one not build up hope upon the
future? Thinking, 'My eye may be thus in the future and forms
may be thus,' one does not set one's heart on obtaining what has
not yet been obtained. Because one does not set one's heart thus,
one does not delight in that. When one does not delight in that,
one does not build up hope upon the future.

"Thinking, 'My ear may be thus in the future and sounds may
be thus... My nose and odours... My tongue and flavours... My
body and tangibles... My mind may be thus in the future and
mind-objects may be thus/ one does not set one's heart on
obtaining what has not yet been obtained. Because one does not
set one's heart thus, one does not delight in that. When one does
not delight in that, one does not build up hope upon the future.
That is how one does not build up hope upon the future.

17. "How is one vanquished in regard to presently arisen
states? In regard to the eye and forms that are presently arisen,
one's consciousness is bound up with desire and lust for that
which is presently arisen. Because one's consciousness is bound
up with desire and lust, one delights in that. When one delights
in that, one is vanquished in regard to presently arisen states.

"In regard to the ear and sounds that are presently arisen... the
nose and odours... the tongue and flavours... the body and tangi-
bles... the mind and mind-objects that are presently arisen, one's
consciousness is bound up with desire and lust for that which is
presently arisen. Because one's consciousness is bound up with
desire and lust, one delights in that. When one delights in that,
one is vanquished in regard to presently arisen states. That is
how one is vanquished in regard to presently arisen states.

18. "How is one invincible in regard to presently arisen states?
In regard to the eye and forms that are presently arisen, one's
consciousness is not bound up with desire and lust for that
which is presently arisen. Because one's consciousness is not
bound up with desire and lust, one does not delight in that.
When one does not delight in that, one is invincible in regard to
presently arisen states.

"In regard to the ear and sounds that are presently arisen. . .


iii 199


Maha Kaccana and One Fortunate Attachment 1049


the nose and odours... the tongue and flavours... the body and
tangibles... the mind and mind-objects that are presently arisen,
[198] one's consciousness is not bound up with desire and lust
for that which is presently arisen. Because one's consciousness is
not bound up with desire and lust, one does not delight in that.
When one does not delight in that, one is invincible in regard to
presently arisen states. That is how one is invincible in regard to
presently arisen states.

19. "Friends, when the Blessed One rose from his seat and
went into his dwelling after giving a summary in brief without
expounding the detailed meaning, that is:

'Let not a person revive the past...

Who has one fortunate attachment,'

I understand the detailed meaning of this summary to be thus.
Now, friends, if you wish, go to the Blessed One and ask him
about the meaning of this. As the Blessed One explains it to you,
so you should remember it."

20. Then the bhikkhus, having delighted and rejoiced in the
venerable Maha Kaccana's words, rose from their seats and
went to the Blessed One. After paying homage to him, they sat
down at one side and told the Blessed One all that had taken
place after he had left, adding: [199] "Then, venerable sir, we
went to the venerable Maha Kaccana and asked him about the
meaning. The venerable Maha Kaccana expounded the meaning
to us with these terms, statements, and phrases."

21. "Maha Kaccana is wise, bhikkhus, Maha Kaccana has great
wisdom. If you had asked me the meaning of this, I would have
explained it to you in the same way that Maha Kaccana has
explained it. Such is its meaning, and so you should remember it."'

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


134 Lomasakangiyabhaddekaratta Sutta
Lomasakangiya and
One Fortunate Attachment


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. Now on
that occasion the venerable Lomasakangiya was living in the
Sakyan country at Kapilavatthu in Nigrodha's Park. 1221

2. Then, when the night was well advanced, Candana, a
young deity of beautiful appearance who illuminated the whole
of Nigrodha's Park, approached the venerable Lomasakangiya.
Standing at one side, Candana the young deity said to him:

"Bhikkhu, do you remember the summary and exposition of
'One Who Has One Fortunate Attachment'?" [200]

"Friend, I do not remember the summary and exposition of
'One Who Has One Fortunate Attachment.' But, friend, do you
remember the summary and exposition of 'One Who Flas One
Fortunate Attachment'?"

"Bhikkhu, I too do not remember the summary and exposition
of 'One Who Has One Fortunate Attachment.' But, bhikkhu, do
you remember the stanza of 'One Who Has One Fortunate
Attachment'?"

"Friend, I do not remember the stanza of 'One Who Has One
Fortunate Attachment.' But, friend, do you remember the stanza
of 'One Who Has One Fortunate Attachment'?"

"Bhikkhu, I remember the stanza of 'One Who Has One
Fortunate Attachment.'"

"But, friend, in what way do you remember the stanza of 'One
Who Has One Fortunate Attachment'?"

"Bhikkhu, once the Blessed One was living among the gods of
the heaven of the Thirty-three, on the Red Marble Stone at the
root of the Paricchattaka tree. 1222 There the Blessed One recited
the summary and exposition of 'One Who Has One Fortunate


1050


iii 201


Lomasakangiya and One Fortunate Attachment 1051


Attachment' to the gods of the heaven of the Thirty-three:

3. 'Let not a person revive the past
Or on the future build his hopes;

For the past has been left behind
And the future has not been reached.

Instead with insight let him see
Each presently arisen state;

Let him know that and be sure of it.

Invincibly, unshakeably.

Today the effort must be made;

Tomorrow Death may come, who knows?

No bargain with Mortality

Can keep him and his hordes away.

But one who dwells thus ardently.

Relentlessly, by day, by night -
It is he, the Peaceful Sage has said.

Who has one fortunate attachment.'

4. "Bhikkhu, I remember the stanza of 'One Who Has One
Fortunate Attachment' thus. Bhikkhu, learn the summary and
exposition of 'One Who Has One Fortunate Attachment.'
Bhikkhu, master the summary and exposition of 'One Who Has
One Fortunate Attachment.' Bhikkhu, remember the summary
and exposition of 'One Who Has One Fortunate Attachment.'
Bhikkhu, the summary and exposition of 'One Who Has One
Fortunate Attachment' is beneficial, it belongs to the fundamen-
tals of the holy life."

That is what was said by Candana the young deity, who
thereupon vanished at once.

5. Then, when the night was over, the venerable Lomasakan-
giya set his resting place in order, and taking his bowl and outer
robe, set out to wander by stages to Savatthl. He [201] at length
arrived at Savatthl, and went to the Blessed One in Jeta's Grove,
Anathapindika's Park. After paying homage to him, he sat
down at one side, told the Blessed One all that had occurred,
and said: "It would be good, venerable sir, if the Blessed One
would teach me the summary and exposition of 'One Who Has
One Fortunate Attachment.'"



iii 202


1052 Lomasakangiyabhaddekaratta Sutta: Sutta 134


6. "Bhikkhu, do you know that young deity?"

"No, venerable sir."

"Bhikkhu, that young deity is named Candana. He heeds the
Dhamma, gives it attention, engages it with all his mind, hears it
with eager ears. So, bhikkhu, listen and attend closely to what I
shall say."

"Yes, venerable sir," the venerable Lomasakangiya replied to
the Blessed One. The Blessed One said this:

7-14. "Let not a person revive the past. . .

(Repeat the whole of Sutta 131, §§3-10 up to:) [202]

Who has one fortunate attachment."

That is what the Blessed One said. The Venerable Lomasakan-
giya was satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


135 Culakammavibhanga Sutta
The Shorter Exposition of Action


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Savatthl in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.

2. Then the brahmin student Subha, Todeyya's son, went to
the Blessed One and exchanged greetings with him. 1223 When
this courteous and amiable talk was finished, he sat down at one
side and asked the Blessed One:

3. "Master Gotama, what is the cause and condition why
human beings are seen to be inferior and superior? For people
are seen to be short-lived and long-lived, sickly and healthy,
ugly and beautiful, uninfluential and influential, poor and
wealthy, low-born and high-born, stupid and [203] wise. What
is the cause and condition. Master Gotama, why human beings
are seen to be inferior and superior?"

4. "Student, beings are owners of their actions, heirs of their
actions; they originate from their actions, are bound to their
actions, have their actions as their refuge. It is action that distin-
guishes beings as inferior and superior."

"I do not understand in detail the meaning of Master
Gotama's statement, which he spoke in brief without expound-
ing the meaning in detail. It would be good if Master Gotama
would teach me the Dhamma so that I might understand in
detail the meaning of Master Gotama's statement."

"Then, student, listen and attend closely to what I shall say."

"Yes, sir," the brahmin student Subha replied. The Blessed
One said this:

5. "Here, student, some man or woman kills living beings and
is murderous, bloody-handed, given to blows and violence, mer-
ciless to living beings. Because of performing and undertaking
such action, on the dissolution of the body, after death, he reap-
pears in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in


1053


1054 Culakammavibhanga Sutta: Sutta 135 iii 204


perdition, even in hell. But if on the dissolution of the body,
after death, he does not reappear in a state of deprivation, in an
unhappy destination, in perdition, in hell, but instead comes
back to the human state, then wherever he is reborn he is short-
lived. 1224 This is the way, student, that leads to short life, namely,
one kills living being and is murderous, bloody-handed, given
to blows and violence, merciless to living beings.

6. "But here, student, some man or woman, abandoning the
killing of living beings, abstains from killing living beings; with
rod and weapon laid aside, gentle and kindly, he abides com-
passionate to all living beings. Because of performing and
undertaking such action, on the dissolution of the body, after
death, he reappears in a happy destination, even in the heavenly
world. But if on the dissolution of the body, after death, he does
not reappear in a happy destination, in the heavenly world, but
instead comes back to the human state, then wherever he is
reborn he is long-lived. 1225 This is the way, student, that leads to
long life, namely, abandoning the killing of living beings, [204]
one abstains from killing living beings; with rod and weapon
laid aside, gentle and kindly, one abides compassionate to all
living beings.

7. "Here, student, some man or woman is given to injuring
beings with the hand, with a clod, with a stick, or with a knife.
Because of performing and undertaking such action, on the dis-
solution of the body, after death, he reappears in a state of
deprivation.. .But if instead he comes back to the human state,
then wherever he is reborn he is sickly. This is the way, student,
that leads to sickliness, namely, one is given to injuring beings
with the hand, with a clod, with a stick, or with a knife.

8. "But here, student, some man or woman is not given to
injuring beings with the hand, with a clod, with a stick, or with a
knife. Because of performing and undertaking such action, on
the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears in a happy
destination... But if instead he comes back to the human state,
then wherever he is reborn he is healthy. This is the way, stu-
dent, that leads to health, namely, one is not given to injuring
beings with the hand, with a clod, with a stick, or with a knife.

9. "Here, student, some man or woman is of an angry and irri-
table character; even when criticised a little, he is offended,
becomes angry, hostile, and resentful, and displays anger, hate.


iii 205


The Shorter Exposition of Action 1055


and bitterness. Because of performing and undertaking such
action... he reappears in a state of deprivation... But if instead he
comes back to the human state, then wherever he is reborn he is
ugly. This is the way, student, that leads to ugliness, namely,
one is of an angry and irritable character... and displays anger,
hate, and bitterness.

10. "But here, student, some man or woman is not of an angry
and irritable character; even when criticised a little, he is not
offended, does not become angry, hostile, and resentful, and
does not display anger, hate, and bitterness. Because of per-
forming and undertaking such action... he reappears in a happy
destination... But if instead he comes back to the human state,
then wherever he is reborn he is beautiful. This is the way, stu-
dent, that leads to being beautiful, namely, one is not of an
angry and irritable character. . .and does not display anger, hate,
and bitterness.

11. "Here, student, some man or woman is envious, one who
envies, resents, and begrudges the gains, honour, respect, rever-
ence, salutations, and veneration received by others. Because of
performing and undertaking such action... he reappears in a
state of deprivation... But if instead he comes back to the human
state, then wherever he is reborn he is uninfluential. This is the
way, student, that leads to being uninfluential, namely, one is
envious... towards the gains, honour, respect, reverence, saluta-
tions, and veneration received by others. [205]

12. "But here, student, some man or woman is not envious,
one who does not envy, resent, and begrudge the gains, honour,
respect, reverence, salutations, and veneration received by others.
Because of performing and undertaking such action... he reap-
pears in a happy destination... But if instead he comes back to
the human state, then wherever he is reborn he is influential.
This is the way, student, that leads to being influential, namely,
one is not envious... towards the gains, honour, respect, rever-
ence, salutations, and veneration received by others.

13. "Here, student, some man or woman does not give food,
drink, clothing, carriages, garlands, scents, unguents, beds,
dwelling, and lamps to recluses or brahmins. Because of per-
forming and undertaking such action. ..he reappears in a state of
deprivation... But if instead he comes back to the human state,
then wherever he is reborn he is poor. This is the way, student.


iii 205


1056 Culakammavibhanga Sutta: Sutta 135


that leads to poverty, namely, one does not give food... and
lamps to recluses or brahmins.

14. "But here, student, some man or woman gives food... and
lamps to recluses or brahmins. Because of performing and
undertaking such action... he reappears in a happy destina-
tion... But if instead he comes back to the human state, then
wherever he is reborn he is wealthy. This is the way, student,
that leads to wealth, namely, one gives food... and lamps to
recluses or brahmins.

15. "Here, student, some man or woman is obstinate and arro-
gant; he does not pay homage to one who should receive
homage, does not rise up for one in whose presence he should
rise up, does not offer a seat to one who deserves a seat, does
not make way for one for whom he should make way, and does
not honour, respect, revere, and venerate one who should be
honoured, respected, revered, and venerated. Because of per-
forming and undertaking such action. . .he reappears in a state of
deprivation... But if instead he comes back to the human state,
then wherever he is reborn he is low-born. This is the way, stu-
dent, that leads to low birth, namely, one is obstinate and arro-
gant... and does not honour, respect, revere, and venerate one
who should be honoured, respected, revered, and venerated.

16. "But here, student, some man or woman is not obstinate
and arrogant; he pays homage to one who should receive
homage, rises up for one in whose presence he should rise up,
offers a seat to one who deserves a seat, makes way for one for
whom he should make way, and honours, respects, reveres, and
venerates one who should be honoured, respected, revered, and
venerated. Because of performing and undertaking such
action... he reappears in a happy destination... But if instead he
comes back to the human state, then wherever he is reborn he is
high-born. This is the way, student, that leads to high birth,
namely, one is not obstinate and arrogant... and honours,
respects, reveres, and venerates one who should be honoured,
respected, revered, and venerated.

17. "Here, student, some man or woman does not visit a
recluse or a brahmin and ask: 'Venerable sir, what is whole-
some? What is unwholesome? What is blameable? What is
blameless? What should be cultivated? What should not be cul-
tivated? What kind of action will lead to my harm and suffering
for a long time? What kind of action will lead to my welfare and


iii 206


The Shorter Exposition of Action 1057


happiness for a long time?' Because of performing and under-
taking such action... he reappears in a state of deprivation... But
if instead he comes back to the human state, then wherever he is
reborn he is stupid. This is the way, student, that leads to stu-
pidity, namely, one does not visit a recluse or brahmin and ask
such questions. [206]

18. "But here, student, some man or woman visits a recluse or
a brahmin and asks: 'Venerable sir, what is wholesome?... What
kind of action will lead to my welfare and happiness for a long
time?' Because of performing and undertaking such action. . .he
reappears in a happy destination.. .But if instead he comes back
to the human state, then wherever he is reborn he is wise. This is
the way, student, that leads to wisdom, namely, one visits a
recluse or brahmin and asks such questions.

19. "Thus, student, the way that leads to short life makes peo-
ple short-lived, the way that leads to long life makes people
long-lived; the way that leads to sickliness makes people sickly,
the way that leads to health makes people healthy; the way that
leads to ugliness makes people ugly, the way that leads to being
beautiful makes people beautiful; the way that leads to being
uninfluential makes people uninfluential, the way that leads to
being influential makes people influential; the way that leads to
poverty makes people poor, the way that leads to wealth makes
people wealthy; the way that leads to low birth makes people
low-born, the way that leads to high birth makes people high-
born; the way that leads to stupidity makes people stupid, the
way that leads to wisdom makes people wise.

20. "Beings are owners of their actions, student, heirs of their
actions; they originate from their actions, are bound to their
actions, have their actions as their refuge. It is action that distin-
guishes beings as inferior and superior."

21. When this was said, the brahmin student Subha,
Todeyya's son, said to the Blessed One: "Magnificent, Master
Gotama! Magnificent, Master Gotama! Master Gotama has made
the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning
upright what had been overturned, revealing what was hidden,
showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in
the dark for those with eyesight to see forms. I go to Master
Gotama for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the Sangha of
bhikkhus. Let Master Gotama remember me as a lay follower
who has gone to him for refuge for life."


136 Mahakammavibhanga Sutta
The Greater Exposition of Action


[207] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One
was living at Rajagaha, in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels'
Sanctuary.

2. Now on that occasion the venerable Samiddhi was living in
a forest hut. Then the wanderer Potaliputta, while wandering
and walking for exercise, went to the venerable Samiddhi and
exchanged greetings with him. When this courteous and ami-
able talk was finished, he sat down at one side and said to the
venerable Samiddhi:

"Friend Samiddhi, I heard and learned this from the recluse
Gotama's own lips: 'Bodily action is vain, verbal action is vain,
only r ental action is real.' And: 'There is that attainment on
ente’ ig which one does not feel anything at all.'" 1226

"Do not say so, friend Potaliputta, do not say so. Do not mis-
represent the Blessed One; it is not good to misrepresent the
Blessed One. The Blessed One would not speak thus: 'Bodily
action is vain, verbal action is vain, only mental action is real.'
But, friend, there is that attainment on entering which one does
not feel anything at all."

"How long is it since you went forth, friend Samiddhi?"

"Not long, friend: three years."

"There now, what shall we say to the elder bhikkhus when a
young bhikkhu thinks the Teacher is to be defended thus?
Friend Samiddhi, having done an intentional action by way of
body, speech, or mind, what does one feel?"

"Having done an intentional action by way of body, speech,
or mind, one feels suffering, friend Potaliputta."

Then, neither approving nor disapproving of the venerable
Samiddhi's words, the wanderer Potaliputta rose from his seat
and departed.


J


1058


iii 209


The Greater Exposition of Action 1059


3. Soon after the wanderer Potaliputta had left, the venerable
Samiddhi went to the venerable Ananda [208] and exchanged
greetings with him. When this courteous and amiable talk was
finished, he sat down at one side and reported to the venerable
Ananda his entire conversation with the wanderer Potaliputta.
After he had spoken, the venerable Ananda told him: "Friend
Samiddhi, this conversation should be told to the Blessed One.
Come, let us approach the Blessed One and tell him this. As the
Blessed One explains to us, so we shall bear it in mind." - "Yes,
friend," the venerable Samiddhi replied.

4. Then the venerable Ananda and the venerable Samiddhi
went together to the Blessed One, and after paying homage to
him, they sat down at one side. The venerable Ananda reported
to the Blessed One the entire conversation between the vener-
able Samiddhi and the wanderer Potaliputta.

5. When he had finished, the Blessed One told the venerable
Ananda: "Ananda, I do not even recall ever having seen the
wanderer Potaliputta, so how could there have been this conver-
sation? Though the wanderer Potaliputta's question should
have been analysed before being answered, this misguided man
answered it one-sidedly."

6. When this was said, the venerable Udayin said to the Blessed
One: "Venerable sir, perhaps the venerable Samiddhi spoke thus
referring to [the principle]: 'Whatever is felt is suffering.'" 1227

Then the Blessed One addressed the venerable Ananda: "See,
Ananda, how this misguided man Udayin interferes. I knew,
Ananda, that this misguided man Udayin would unduly inter-
fere right now. From the start the wanderer Potaliputta had
asked about the three kinds of feeling. This misguided man
Samiddhi [209] would have answered the wanderer Potaliputta
rightly if, when asked thus, he would have explained: 'Friend
Potaliputta, having done an intentional action by way of body,
speech, or mind [whose result is] to be felt as pleasant, one feels
pleasure. Having done an intentional action by way of body,
speech, or mind [whose result is] to be felt as painful, one feels
pain. Having done an intentional action by way of body, speech,
or mind [whose result is] to be felt as neither-pain-nor-pleasure,
one feels neither-pain-nor-pleasure.' But who are these foolish,
thoughtless wanderers of other sects, that they could under-
stand the Tathagata's great exposition of action? You should


iii 210


1060 Mahaka m ma vibha nga Sutta: Suita 136


listen, Ananda, to the Tathagata as he expounds the great expo-
sition of action.”

7. "This is the time, Blessed One, this is the time. Sublime One,
for the Blessed One to expound the great exposition of action.
Having heard it from the Blessed One, the bhikkhus will
remember it."

"Then listen, Ananda, and attend closely to what I shall say."

"Yes, venerable sir," the venerable Ananda replied. The
Blessed One said this:

8. "Ananda, 1228 there are four kinds of persons to be found
existing in the world. What four? Here some person kills living
beings, takes what is not given, misconducts himself in sensual
pleasures, speaks falsehood, speaks maliciously, speaks harshly,
gossips; he is covetous, has a mind of ill will, and holds wrong
view. On the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears
in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in perdi-
tion, even in hell.

"But here some person kills living beings... and holds wrong
view. On the dissolution of the body, after death, he reappears
in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world.

"Here some person abstains from killing living beings, from
taking what is not given, from misconduct in sensual pleasures,
from false speech, from malicious speech, [210] from harsh
speech, from gossip; he is not covetous, his mind is without ill
will, and he holds right view. On the dissolution of the body,
after death, he reappears in a happy destination, even in the
heavenly world.

"But here some person abstains from killing living beings...
and he holds right view. On the dissolution of the body, after
death, he reappears in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy des-
tination, in perdition, even in hell.

9. "Here, Ananda, by means of ardour, endeavour, devotion,
diligence, and right attention, some recluse or brahmin attains
such concentration of mind that, when his mind is concentrated,
with the divine eye, which is purified and surpasses the human,
he sees that person here who kills living beings... and holds
wrong view, and he sees that on the dissolution of the body,
after death, he has reappeared in a state of deprivation, in an
unhappy destination, in perdition, even in hell. He says thus:
'Indeed, there are evil actions, there is result of misconduct; for I


iii 211


The Greater Exposition of Action 1061


saw a person here who killed living beings... and held wrong
view, and I see that on the dissolution of the body, after death,
he has reappeared in a state of deprivation... even in hell.' He
says thus: 'On the dissolution of the body, after death, everyone
who kills living beings... and holds wrong view reappears in a
state of deprivation... even in hell. Those who know thus know
rightly; those who think otherwise are mistaken.’ Thus he obsti-
nately adheres to what he himself has known, seen, and discov-
ered, insisting: 'Only this is true, anything else is wrong.'

10. "But here, Ananda, [211] by means of ardour. ..some
recluse or brahmin attains such a concentration of mind that,
when his mind is concentrated, with the divine eye, which is
purified and surpasses the human, he sees that person here who
kills living beings... and holds wrong view, and he sees that on
the dissolution of the body, after death, he has reappeared in a
happy destination, even in the heavenly world. He says thus:
'Indeed, there are no evil actions, there is no result of miscon-
duct; for I saw a person here who killed living beings. . .and held
wrong view, and I see that on the dissolution of the body, after
death, he has reappeared in a happy destination, even in the
heavenly world.' He says thus: 'On the dissolution of the body,
after death, everyone who kills living beings... and holds wrong
view reappears in a happy destination, even in the heavenly
world. Those who know thus know rightly; those who think
otherwise are mistaken.' Thus he obstinately adheres to what he
himself has known, seen, and discovered, insisting: 'Only this is
true, anything else is wrong.'

11. "Here, Ananda, by means of ardour... some recluse or
brahmin attains such a concentration of mind that, when his
mind is concentrated, with the divine eye, which is purified and
surpasses the human, he sees that person here who abstains
from killing living beings... and holds right view, and he sees
that on the dissolution of the body, after death, he has reappeared
in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world. He says thus:
'Indeed, there are good actions, there is result of good conduct;
for I saw a person here who abstained from killing living
beings... and held right view, and I see that on the dissolution of
the body, after death, he has reappeared in a happy destination,
even in the heavenly world.' He says thus: 'On the dissolution of
the body, after death, everyone who abstains from killing living


iii 212


1062 Matokammavibhanga Sutta: Sutta 136


beings... and holds right view reappears in a happy destination,
even in the heavenly world. Those who know thus know right-
ly; those who think otherwise are mistaken/ Thus he obstinately
adheres to what he himself has known, seen, and discovered,
insisting: 'Only this is true, anything else is wrong/

12. "But here, Ananda, [212] by means of ardour. ..some
recluse or brahmin attains such a concentration of mind that,
when his mind is concentrated, with the divine eye, which is
purified and surpasses the human, he sees that person here who
abstains from killing living beings... and holds right view, and
he sees that on the dissolution of the body, after death, he reap-
pears in a state of deprivation, in an unhappy destination, in
perdition, even in hell. He says thus: 'Indeed, there are no good
actions, there is no result of good conduct; for I saw a person
here who abstained from killing living beings... and held right
view, and I see that on the dissolution of the body, after death,
he has reappeared in a state of deprivation... even in hell/ He
says thus: 'On the dissolution of the body, after death, everyone
who abstains from killing living beings... and holds right view
reappears in a state of deprivation... even in hell. Those who
know thus know rightly; those who think otherwise are mis-
taken.' Thus he obstinately adheres to what he himself has
known, seen, and discovered, insisting: 'Only this is true, any-
thing else is wrong.'

13. "Therein, Ananda, 1229 when a recluse or brahmin says:
'Indeed, there are evil 'actions, there is result of misconduct/ I
grant him this. When he says: 'I saw a person here who killed
living beings... and held wrong view, and I see that on the dis-
solution of the body, after death, he has reappeared in a state of
deprivation... even in hell,’ I also grant him this. But when he
says: 'On the dissolution of the body, after death, everyone who
kills living beings... and holds wrong view reappears in a state
of deprivation... even in hell,' I do not grant him this. And
when he says: 'Those who know thus know rightly; those who
think otherwise are mistaken,' I also do not grant him this. And
when he obstinately adheres to what he himself has known,
seen, and discovered, insisting: 'Only this is true, anything else
is wrong/ I also do not grant him this. Why is that? Because,
Ananda, the Tathagata's knowledge of the great exposition of
action is otherwise.


iii 213


The Greater Exposition of Action 1063


14. "Therein, Ananda, when a recluse or brahmin says:
'Indeed, there are no evil actions, there is no result of miscon-
duct,' I do not grant him this. When he says: 'I saw a person
here who killed living beings... and held wrong view, and I see
that on the dissolution of the body, after death, he has reap-
peared in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world,' I
grant him this. But when he says: "On the dissolution of the
body, after death, everyone who kills living beings... and holds
wrong view reappears in a happy destination, even in the
heavenly world/ [213] I do not grant him this. And when he
says: 'Those who know thus know rightly; those who think
otherwise are mistaken/ I also do not grant him this. And
when he obstinately adheres to what he himself has known,
seen, and discovered, insisting: 'Only this is true, anything else
is wrong/ I also do not grant him this. Why is that? Because,
Ananda, the Tathagata's knowledge of the great exposition of
action is otherwise.

15. "Therein, Ananda, when a recluse or brahmin says:
'Indeed, there are good actions, there is result of good conduct/
I grant him this. And when he says: 'I saw a person here who
abstained from killing living beings... and held right view, and I
see that on the dissolution of the body, after death, he has reap-
peared in a happy destination, even in the heavenly world/ I
also grant him this. But when he says: 'On the dissolution of
the body, after death, everyone who abstains from killing living
beings... and holds right view reappears in a happy destina-
tion, even in the heavenly world/ I do not grant him this. And
when he says: 'Those who know thus know rightly; those who
think otherwise are mistaken/ I also do not grant him this. And
when he obstinately adheres to what he himself has known,
seen, and discovered, insisting: 'Only this is true, anything else
is wrong,' I also do not grant him this. Why is that? Because,
Ananda, the Tathagata's knowledge of the great exposition of
action is otherwise.

16. "Therein, Ananda, when a recluse or brahmin says:
'Indeed, there are no good actions, there is no result of good con-
duct/ I do not grant him this. When he says: 'I saw a person here
who abstained from killing living beings... and held right view,
and I see that on the dissolution of the body, after death, he has
reappeared in a state of deprivation... even in hell/ I grant him


iii 214


1064 Mahakammavibhanga Sutta: Sutta 136


this. But when he says: 'On the dissolution of the body, after
death, everyone who abstains from killing living beings... and
holds right view reappears in a state of deprivation... even in
hell/ I do not grant him this. And when he says: [214] 'Those
who know thus know rightly; those who think otherwise are
mistaken/ I also do not grant him this. And when he obstinately
adheres to what he himself has known, seen, and discovered,
insisting: 'Only this is true, anything else is wrong/ I also do not
grant him this. Why is that? Because, Ananda, the Tathagata's
knowledge of the great exposition of action is otherwise.

17. "Therein, Ananda, 1230 as to the person here who kills living
beings... and holds wrong view, and on the dissolution of the
body, after death, reappears in a state of deprivation... even in
hell: either earlier he did an evil action to be felt as painful, or
later he did an evil action to be felt as painful, or at the time of
death he acquired and undertook wrong view. 1231 Because of
that, on the dissolution of the body, after death, he has reap-
peared in a state of deprivation... even in hell. And since he has
here killed living beings.. .and held wrong view, he will experi-
ence the result of that either here and now, or in his next rebirth,
or in some subsequent existence. 1232

18. "Therein, Amanda, as to the person here who kills living
beings... and holds wrong view, and on the dissolution of the
body, after death, reappears in a happy destination, even in the
heavenly world: either earlier he did a good- action to be felt as
pleasant, or later he did a good action to be felt as pleasant, or at
the time of death he acquired and undertook right view. 1233
Because of that, on the dissolution of the body, after death, he
has reappeared in a happy destination, even in the heavenly
world. But since he has here killed living beings... and held
wrong view, he will experience the result of that either here and
now, or in his next rebirth, or in some subsequent existence.

19. "Therein, Ananda, as to the person here who abstains from
killing living beings. ..and holds right view, and on the dissolu-
tion of the body, after death, reappears in a happy destination,
even in the heavenly world: either earlier he did a good action
to be felt as pleasant, or later he did a good action to be felt as
pleasant, or at the time of death he acquired and undertook
right view. Because of that, on the dissolution of the body, after
death, he has reappeared in a happy destination, even in the


iii 215


The Greater Exposition of Action 1065


heavenly world. And since he has here abstained from killing
living beings [215]... and held right view, he will experience the
result of that either here and now, or in his next rebirth, or in
some subsequent existence.

20. "Therein, Ananda, as to the person here who abstains from
killing living beings... and holds right view, and on the dissolu-
tion of the body, after death, reappears in a state of depriva-
tion. . .even in hell: either earlier he did an evil action to be felt as
painful, or later he did an evil action to be felt as painful, or at
the time of death he acquired and undertook wrong view.
Because of that, on the dissolution of the body, after death, he
has reappeared in a state of deprivation... even in hell. But since
he has here abstained from killing living beings... and held right
view, he will experience the result of that either here and now,
or in his next rebirth, or in some subsequent existence.

21. "Thus, Ananda, there is action that is incapable [of good
result] and appears incapable; there is action that is incapable
[of good result] and appears capable; there is action that is capa-
ble [of good result] and appears capable; and there is action that
is capable [of good result] and appears incapable." 1234

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Ananda was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


137 Salayatanavibhanga Sutta
The Exposition of the Sixfold Base

ii


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There he
addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, I shall teach you an exposition of the sixfold
base. Listen and attend closely to what I shall say." - "Yes, vener-
able sir," the bhikkhus replied. The Blessed One said this: [216]

3. "The six internal bases should be understood. The six exter-
nal bases should be understood. The six classes of conscious-
ness should be understood. The six classes of contact should be
understood. The eighteen kinds of mental exploration should be
understood. The thirty-six positions of beings should be under-
stood. Therein, by depending on this, abandon that. There are
three foundations of mindfulness that the Noble One cultivates,
cultivating which the Noble One is a teacher fit to instruct a
group. Among the teachers of training it is he that is called the
incomparable leader of persons to be tamed. This is the summa-
ry of the exposition of the sixfold base.

4. "'The six internal bases should be understood.' So it was
said. And with reference to what was this said? There are the
eye-base, the ear-base, the nose-base, the tongue-base, the body-
base, and the mind-base. So it was with reference to this that it
was said: 'The six internal bases should be understood.'

5. "'The six external bases should be understood.' So it was said.
And with reference to what was this said? There are the form-
base, the sound-base, the odour-base, the flavour-base, the tangi-
ble-base, and the mind-object-base. So it was with reference to this
that it was said: 'The six external bases should be understood.'

6. "'The six classes of consciousness should be understood.' So
it was said. And with reference to what was this said? There are


(


1066


iii 217


The Exposition of the Sixfold Base 1067


eye-consciousness, ear-consciousness, nose-consciousness,
tongue-consciousness, body-consciousness, and mind-
consciousness. So it was with reference to this that it was said:
'The six classes of consciousness should be understood.'

7. '"The six classes of contact should be understood.' So it was
said. And with reference to what was this said? There are eye-
contact, ear-contact, nose-contact, tongue-contact, body-contact,
and mind-contact. So it was with reference to this that it was
said: 'The six classes of contact should be understood.'

8. "'The eighteen kinds of mental exploration should be under-
stood.' 1235 So it was said. And with reference to what was this said?

"On seeing a form with the eye, one explores a form produc-
tive of joy, one explores a form productive of grief, one explores
a form productive of equanimity. 1236 On hearing a sound with
the ear... On smelling an odour with the nose... On tasting a
flavour with the tongue... [21 7] On touching a tangible with the
body. . .On cognizing a mind-object with the mind, one explores a
mind-object productive of joy, one explores a mind-object pro-
ductive of grief, one explores a mind-object productive of equa-
nimity. Thus there are six kinds of exploration with joy, six kinds
of exploration with grief, and six kinds of exploration with equa-
nimity. So it was with reference to this that it was said: 'The eigh-
teen kinds of mental exploration should be understood.'

9. "'The thirty-six positions of beings should be understood.' 1237
So it was said. And with reference to what was this said? There
are six kinds of joy based on the household life and six kinds of
joy based on renunciation. 1238 There are six kinds of grief based
on the household life and six kinds of grief based on renunciation.
There are six kinds of equanimity based on the household life and
six kinds of equanimity based on renunciation.

10. "Herein, what are the six kinds of joy based on the house-
hold life? When one regards as an acquisition the acquisition of
forms cognizable by the eye that are wished for, desired, agree-
able, gratifying, and associated with worldliness - or when one
recalls what was formerly acquired that has passed, ceased, and
changed - joy arises. Such joy as this is called joy based on the
household life.

"When one regards as an acquisition the acquisition of sounds
cognizable by the ear.. .the acquisition of odours cognizable by
the nose. . .the acquisition of flavours cognizable by the tongue. . .


iii 218


1068 Salayatanavibhanga Sutta: Sutta 137


the acquisition of tangibles cognizable by the body... the acquisi-
tion of mind-objects cognizable by the mind that are wished for,
desired, agreeable, gratifying, and associated with worldliness -
or when one recalls what was formerly acquired that has
passed, ceased, and changed - joy arises. Such joy as this is
called joy based on the household life. These are the six kinds of
joy based on the household life.

11. "Herein, what are the six kinds of joy based on renuncia-
tion? When, by knowing the impermanence, change, fading
away, and cessation of forms, one sees as it actually is with
proper wisdom that forms both formerly and now are all imper-
manent, suffering, and subject to change, joy arises. Such joy as
this is called joy based on renunciation. 1239

"When, by knowing the impermanence, change, fading away,
and cessation of sounds. ..of odours. ..of flavours. ..of tangi-
bles... [218] of mind-objects, one sees as it actually is with proper
wisdom that mind-objects both formerly and now are all imper-
manent, suffering, and subject to change, joy arises. Such joy as
this is called joy based on renunciation. These are the six kinds
of joy based on renunciation.

12. "Herein, what are the six kinds of grief based on the
household life? When one regards as a non-acquisition the non-
acquisition of forms cognizable by the eye that are wished for,
desired, agreeable, gratifying, and associated with worldliness -
or when one recalls what was formerly not acquired that has
passed, ceased, and changed - grief arises. Such grief as this is
called grief based on the household life.

"When one regards as a non-acquisition the non-acquisition of
sounds cognizable by the ear... the non-acquisition of odours
cognizable by the nose... the non-acquisition of flavours cogniz-
able by the tongue... the non-acquisition of tangibles cognizable
by the body... the non-acquisition of mind-objects cognizable by
the mind that are wished for, desired, agreeable, gratifying, and
associated with worldliness - or when one recalls what was for-
merly not acquired that has passed, ceased, and changed - grief
arises. Such grief as this is called grief based on the household
life. These are the six kinds of grief based on the household life.

13. "Herein, what are the six kinds of grief based on renuncia-
tion? When, by knowing the impermanence, change, fading
away, and cessation of forms, one sees as it actually is with


iii 219


The Exposition of the Sixfold Base 1069


proper wisdom that forms both formerly and now are all imper-
manent, suffering, and subject to change, one generates a longing
for the supreme liberations thus: 'When shall I enter upon and
abide in that base that the noble ones now enter upon and abide
in?' 1240 In one who generates thus a longing for the supreme lib-
erations, grief arises with that longing as condition. Such grief as
this is called grief based on renunciation.

"When, by knowing the impermanence, change, fading away,
and cessation of sounds... of odours... of flavours... of tangibles
...of mind-objects, one sees as it actually is with proper wisdom
that mind-objects both formerly and now are all impermanent,
suffering, and subject to change, [219] one generates a longing
for the supreme liberations thus: 'When shall I enter upon and
abide in that base that the noble ones now enter upon and abide
in?' In one who thus generates a longing for the supreme libera-
tions, grief arises with that longing as condition. Such grief as
this is called grief based on renunciation. These are the six kinds
of grief based on renunciation.

14. "Herein, what are the six kinds of equanimity based on the
household life? On seeing a form with the eye, equanimity aris-
es in a foolish infatuated ordinary person, in an untaught ordi-
nary person who has not conquered his limitations or con-
quered the results [of action] and who is blind to danger. Such
equanimity as this does not transcend the form; that is why it is
called equanimity based on the household life. 1241

"On hearing a sound with the ear. . .On smelling an odour with
the nose... On tasting a flavour with the tongue... On touching a
tangible with the body... On cognizing a mind-object with the
mind, equanimity arises in a foolish infatuated ordinary person,
in an untaught ordinary person who has not conquered his limi-
tations or conquered the results [of action] and who is blind ’to
danger. Such equanimity as this does not transcend the mind-
object; that is why it is called equanimity based on the house-
hold life. These are the six kinds of equanimity based on the
household life.

15. "Herein, what are the six kinds of equanimity based on
renunciation? When, by knowing the impermanence, change,
fading away, and cessation of forms, one sees as it actually is
with proper wisdom that forms both formerly and now are all
impermanent, suffering, and subject to change, equanimity


iii 220



1070 Salayatanavibhanga Sutta: Sutta 137


arises. Such equanimity as this transcends the form; that is why
it is called equanimity based on renunciation. 1242

"When, by knowing the impermanence, change, fading away,
and cessation of sounds. . .of odours. . .of flavours. . .of tangibles. . .
of mind-objects, one sees as it actually is with proper wisdom
that mind-objects both formerly and now are all impermanent,
suffering, and subject to change, equanimity arises. Such equa-
nimity as this transcends the mind-object; that is why it is called
equanimity based on renunciation. These are the six kinds of
equanimity based on renunciation.

"So it was with reference to this that it was said: 'The thirty-
six positions of beings should be understood.' [220]

16. "'Therein, by depending on this, abandon that.' So it was
said. And with reference to what was this said?

"Here, bhikkhus, by depending and relying on the six kinds of
joy based on renunciation, abandon and surmount the six kinds
of joy based on the household life. It is thus they are abandoned;
it is thus they are surmounted. By depending and relying on the
six kinds of grief based on renunciation, abandon and surmount
the six kinds of grief based on the household life. It is thus they
are abandoned; it is thus they are surmounted. By depending
and relying on the six kinds of equanimity based on renuncia-
tion, abandon and surmount the six kinds of equanimity based
on the household life. It is thus they are abandoned; it is thus
they are surmounted.

"By depending and felying on the six kinds of joy based on
renunciation, abandon and surmount the six kinds of grief
based on renunciation. It is thus they are abandoned; it is thus
they are surmounted. By depending and relying on the six kinds
of equanimity based on renunciation, abandon and surmount
the six kinds of joy based on renunciation. It is thus they are
abandoned; it is thus they are surmounted.

17. "There is, bhikkhus, equanimity that is diversified, based on
diversity; and there is equanimity that is unified, based on unity. 1243

18. "And what, bhikkhus, is equanimity that is diversified,
based on diversity? There is equanimity regarding forms,
sounds, odours, flavours, and tangibles. This, bhikkhus, is equa-
nimity that is diversified, based on diversity.

19. "And what, bhikkhus, is equanimity that is unified, based
on unity? There is equanimity regarding the base of infinite


iii 221


The Exposition of the Sixfold Base 1071


space, the base of infinite consciousness, the base of nothing-
ness, and the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
This, bhikkhus, is equanimity that is unified, based on unity.

20. "Here, bhikkhus, by depending and relying on equanimity
that is unified, based on unity, abandon and surmount equanimi-
ty that is diversified, based on diversity. It is thus this is aban-
doned; it is thus this is surmounted. 1244

"Bhikkhus, by depending and relying on non-identification, 1245
abandon and surmount equanimity that is unified, based on unity.
It is thus this is abandoned; it is thus this is surmounted. [221]

"So it was in reference to this that it was said: 'Therein, by
depending on this, abandon that.'

21. "'There are three foundations of mindfulness that the
Noble One cultivates, cultivating which the Noble One is a
teacher fit to instruct a group.' 1246 So it was said. And with refer-
ence to what was this said?

22. "Here, bhikkhus, compassionate and seeking their welfare,
the Teacher teaches the Dhamma to the disciples out of compas-
sion: 'This is for your welfare; this is for your happiness.' His
disciples do not want to hear or give ear or exert their minds to
understand; they err and turn aside from the Teacher's Dispen-
sation. With that the Tathagata is not satisfied and feels no satis-
faction; yet he dwells unmoved, mindful, and fully aware. This,
bhikkhus, is called the first foundation of mindfulness that the
Noble One cultivates, cultivating which the Noble One is a
teacher fit to instruct a group.

23. "Furthermore, bhikkhus, compassionate and seeking their
welfare, the Teacher teaches the Dhamma to the disciples out of
compassion: 'This is for your welfare; this is for your happiness.'
Some of his disciples will not hear or give ear or exert their
minds to understand; they err and turn aside from the Teacher's
Dispensation. Some of his disciples will hear and give ear and
exert their minds to understand; they do not err and turn aside
from the Teacher's Dispensation. With that the Tathagata is not
satisfied and feels no satisfaction, and he is not dissatisfied and
feels no dissatisfaction; remaining free from both satisfaction
and dissatisfaction, he dwells in equanimity, mindful, and fully
aware. This, bhikkhus, is called the second foundation of mind-
fulness that the Noble One cultivates, cultivating which the
Noble One is a teacher fit to instruct a group.


iii 222


1072 Salayatanavibhanga Sutta: Sutta 137


24. "Furthermore, bhikkhus, compassionate and seeking their
welfare, the Teacher teaches the Dhamma to the disciples out of
compassion: 'This is for your welfare; this is for your happiness.'
His disciples will hear and give ear and exert their minds to
understand; they do not err and turn aside from the Teacher's
Dispensation. With that the Tathagata is satisfied and feels satis-
faction; yet he dwells unmoved, mindful, and fully aware. This,
bhikkhus, is called the third foundation of mindfulness that the
Noble One cultivates, cultivating which the Noble One is a
teacher fit to instruct a group. [222]

"So it was with reference to this that it was said: "There are three
foundations of mindfulness that the Noble One cultivates, cultivat-
ing which the Noble One is a teacher fit to instruct a group.'

25. "'Among the teachers of training it is he that is called the
incomparable leader of persons to be tamed.' 1247 So it was said.
And with reference to what was this said?

"Guided by the elephant tamer, bhikkhus, the elephant to be
tamed goes in one direction - east, west, north, or south. Guided
by the horse tamer, bhikkhus, the horse to be tamed goes in one
direction - east, west, north, or south. Guided by the ox tamer,
bhikkhus, the ox to be tamed goes in one direction - east, west,
north, or south.

26. "Bhikkhus, guided by the Tathagata, accomplished and fully
enlightened, the person to be tamed goes in eight directions. 1248

"Possessed of material form, he sees forms: this is the first
direction. Not perceiving forms internally, he sees forms exter-
nally: this is the second direction. He is resolved only upon the
beautiful: this is the third direction. With the complete sur-
mounting of perceptions of form, with the disappearance of
perceptions of sensory impact, with non-attention to perceptions
of diversity, aware that 'space is infinite,' he enters upon and
abides in the base of infinite space: this is the fourth direction.
By completely surmounting the base of infinite space, aware
that 'consciousness is infinite,' he enters upon and abides in the
base of infinite consciousness: this is the fifth direction. By com-
pletely surmounting the base of infinite consciousness, aware
that 'there is nothing,' he enters upon and abides in the base of
nothingness: this is the sixth direction. By completely surmount-
ing the base of nothingness, he enters upon and abides in the
base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception: this is the seventh



iii 222


The Exposition of the Sixfold Base 1073


direction. By completely surmounting the base of neither-
perception-nor-non-perception, he enters upon and abides in the
cessation of perception and feeling: this is the eighth direction.

"Bhikkhus, guided by the Tathagata, accomplished and fully
enlightened, the person to be tamed goes in these eight directions.

28. "So it was with reference to this that it was said: 'Among
the teachers of training it is he that is called the incomparable
leader of persons to be tamed.'"

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


138 Uddesavibhanga Sutta
The Exposition of a Summary


[223] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was
living at Savatthi in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There
the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." -
"Venerable sir," they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, I shall teach you a summary and an exposition.
Listen and attend closely to what I shall say." - "Yes, venerable
sir," the bhikkhus replied. The Blessed One said this:

3. "Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu should examine things in such a
way that while he is examining them, his consciousness is not
distracted and scattered externally nor stuck internally, and by
not clinging he does not become agitated. If his consciousness
is not distracted and scattered externally nor stuck internally,
and if by not clinging he does not become agitated, then for
him there is no origination of suffering - of birth, ageing, and
death in the future."

4. That is what the Blessed One said. Having said this, the
Sublime One rose from his seat and went into his dwelling. 1249

5. Then, soon after the Blessed One had gone, the bhikkhus
considered: "Now, friends, the Blessed One has risen from his
seat and gone into his dwelling after giving a summary in brief
without expounding the detailed meaning. Now who will
expound this in detail?" Then they considered: "The venerable
Maha Kaccana is praised by the Teacher and esteemed by his
wise companions in the holy life. He is capable of expounding
the detailed meaning. Suppose we went to him and asked him
the meaning of this."

6-8. [224, 225] (As at Sutta 133, §§8-10.)

9. "Then listen, friends, and attend closely to what 1 shall say."

"Yes, friend," the bhikkhus replied. The venerable Maha
Kaccana said this:


1074


iii 226


The Exposition of a Summary 1075


10. "How, friends, is consciousness called 'distracted and scat-
tered externally'? 1250 Here, when a bhikkhu has seen a form
with the eye, if his consciousness follows after the sign of form,
is tied and shackled by gratification in the sign of form, 1251 is fet-
tered by the fetter of gratification in the sign of form, then his
consciousness is called 'distracted and scattered externally.'

"When he has heard a sound with the ear... smelt an odour
with the nose. . .tasted a flavour with the tongue. . .touched a tan-
gible with the body... cognized a mind-object with the mind, if
his consciousness follows after the sign of the mind-object, is
tied and shackled by gratification in the sign of the mind-object,
is fettered by the fetter of gratification in the sign of the mind-
object, then his consciousness is called 'distracted and scattered
externally.'

11. "And how, friends, is consciousness called 'not distracted
and scattered externally'? Here, when a bhikkhu has seen a form
with the eye, if his consciousness does not follow after the sign
of form, is not tied and shackled by gratification in the sign of
form, is not fettered by the fetter of gratification in the sign of
form, then his consciousness is called 'not distracted and scat-
tered externally.' [226]

"When he has heard a sound with the ear... smelt an odour
with the nose. . .tasted a flavour with the tongue. . .touched a tan-
gible with the body... cognized a mind-object with the mind, if
his consciousness does not follow after the sign of the mind-
object, is not tied and shackled by gratification in the sign of the
mind-object, is not fettered by the fetter of gratification in the
sign of the mind-object, then his consciousness is called 'not
distracted and scattered externally.'

12. "And how, friends, is the mind called 'stuck inter-
nally'? 1252 Here, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded
from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in
the first jhana, which is accompanied by applied and sustained
thought, with rapture and pleasure born of seclusion. If his
consciousness follows after the rapture and pleasure born of
seclusion, is tied and shackled by gratification in the rapture
and pleasure born of seclusion, then his mind is called 'stuck
internally.'

13. "Again, with the stilling of applied and sustained thought,
a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second jhana, which


1076 Uddesavibhanga Sutta: Sutta 138


iii 227


has self-confidence and singleness of mind without applied and
sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born of concentra-
tion. If his consciousness follows after the rapture and pleasure
born of concentration. . .then his mind is called 'stuck internally.'

14. "Again, with the fading away as well of rapture, a bhikkhu
abides in equanimity, and mindful and fully aware, still feeling
pleasure with the body, he enters upon and abides in the third
jhana, on account of which noble ones announce: 'He has a
pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.' If his con-
sciousness follows after the equanimity... then his mind is called
'stuck internally.'

15. "Again, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain, and
with the previous disappearance of joy and grief, a bhikkhu
enters upon and abides in the fourth jhana, which has neither-
pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mindfulness due to equanimity.
If his consciousness follows after the neither-pain-nor-pleasure,
is tied and shackled by gratification in the neither-pain-nor-
pleasure, is fettered by the fetter of gratification in the neither-
pain-nor-pleasure, then his mind is called 'stuck internally.' That
is how the mind is called 'stuck internally.' [227]

16. "And how, friends, is the mind called 'not stuck internal-
ly'? Here, quite secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the
first jhana... If his consciousness does not follow after the rap-
ture and pleasure bom of seclusion, is not tied and shackled by
gratification in the rapture and pleasure born of seclusion, is not
fettered by the fetter of gratification in the rapture and pleasure
born of seclusion, then his mind is called 'not stuck internally.'

17. "Again, with the stilling of applied and sustained
thought, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the second
jhana... If his consciousness does not follow after the rapture
and pleasure born of concentration... then his mind is called
'not stuck internally.'

18. "Again, with the fading away as well of rapture, a bhik-
khu. ..enters upon and abides in the third jhana. ..If his con-
sciousness does not follow after the equanimity... then his mind
is called 'not stuck internally.'

19. "Again, with the abandoning of pleasure and pain. ..a
bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the fourth jhana. . .If his con-
sciousness does not follow after the neither-pain-nor-pleasure,


iii 228


The Exposition of a Summary 1077


is not tied and shackled by gratification in the neither-pain-nor-
pleasure, is not fettered by the fetter of gratification in the neither-
pain-nor-pleasure, then his mind is called 'not stuck internally/
That is how the mind is called 'not stuck internally.'

20. "How, friends, is there agitation due to clinging? 1253 Here
an untaught ordinary person who has no regard for noble ones
and is unskilled and undisciplined in their Dhamma, who has no
regard for true men and is unskilled and undisciplined in their
Dhamma, regards material form as self, or self as possessed of
material form, or material form as in self, or self as in material
form. That material form of his changes and becomes otherwise.
With the change and becoming otherwise of that material form,
his consciousness is preoccupied with the change of material
form. Agitated mental states born of preoccupation with the
change of material form arise together 1254 and remain obsessing
his mind. Because his mind is obsessed, he is anxious, distressed,
and concerned, and due to clinging he becomes agitated. 1255 [228]

"He regards feeling as self. ..He regards perception as
self... He regards formations as self... He regards consciousness
as self, or self as possessed of consciousness, or consciousness as
in self, or self as in consciousness. That consciousness of his
changes and becomes otherwise. With the change and becoming
otherwise of that consciousness, his consciousness is preoccu-
pied with the change of consciousness. Agitated states of mind
born of preoccupation with the change of consciousness arise
together and remain obsessing his mind. Because his mind is
obsessed, he is anxious, distressed, and concerned, and due to
clinging he becomes agitated. That is how there is agitation due
to clinging.

21. "And how, friends, is there non-agitation due to non-cling-
ing? 1256 Here a well-taught noble disciple who has regard for
noble ones and is skilled and disciplined in their Dhamma, who
has regard for true men and is skilled and disciplined in their
Dhamma, does not regard material form as self, or self as pos-
sessed of material form, or material form as in self, or self as in
material form. That material form of his changes and becomes
otherwise. With the change and becoming otherwise of that
material form, his consciousness is not preoccupied with the
change of material form. Agitated mental states born of preoccu-
pation with the change of material form do not arise together


iii 229


1078 Uddesavibhanga Sutta: Sutta 138


and remain obsessing his mind. Because his mind is not
obsessed, he is not anxious, distressed, and concerned, and due
to non-clinging he does not become agitated.

"He does not regard feeling as self... He does not regard per-
ception as self... He does not regard formations as self... He does
not regard consciousness as self, or self as possessed of con-
sciousness, or consciousness as in self, or self as in conscious-
ness. That consciousness of his changes and becomes otherwise.
With the change and becoming otherwise of that consciousness,
his consciousness is not preoccupied with the change of con-
sciousness. Agitated mental states born of preoccupation with
the change of consciousness do not arise together and remain
obsessing his mind. Because his mind is not obsessed, he is not
anxious, distressed, and concerned, and due to non-clinging he
does not become agitated. That is how there is non-agitation due
to non-clinging.

22. "Friends, when the Blessed One rose from his seat and
went into his dwelling after giving a summary in brief without
expounding the detailed meaning, that is: 'Bhikkhus, a bhikkhu
should examine things in such a way that while he is examining
them, his consciousness is not distracted and scattered externally
nor stuck internally, and by not clinging he does not become
agitated. If his consciousness is not distracted and scattered
externally nor stuck internally, and if by not clinging he does
not become agitated, then for him there is no’ origination of suf-
fering - of birth, ageing, and death in the future/ I understand
the detailed meaning of this summary to be thus. [229] Now,
friends, if you wish, go to the Blessed One and ask him about
the meaning of this. As the Blessed One explains it to you, so
you should remember it."

23. Then the bhikkhus, having delighted and rejoiced in the
venerable Maha Kaccana's words, rose from their seats and
went to the Blessed One. After paying homage to him, they sat
down at one side and told the Blessed One all that had taken
place after he had left, adding: "Then, venerable sir, we went to
the venerable Maha Kaccana and asked him about the meaning.
The venerable Maha Kaccana expounded the meaning to us
with these terms, statements, and phrases."

24. "Maha Kaccana is wise, bhikkhus, Maha Kaccana has great
wisdom. If you had asked me the meaning of this, I would have



1

I iii 229 The Exposition of a Summary 1079


explained it to you in the same way that Maha Kaccana has
explained it. Such is its meaning,, and so you should remember it."

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.




139 Aranavibhanga Sutta
The Exposition of Non-Conflict


[230] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One
was living at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.
There the Blessed One addressed the bhikkhus thus:
"Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir," they replied. The Blessed One
said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, I shall teach you an exposition of non-conflict.
Listen and attend closely to what I shall say." - "Yes, venerable
sir," the bhikkhus replied. The Blessed One said this:

3. "One should not pursue sensual pleasure, which is low,
vulgar, coarse, ignoble, and unbeneficial; and one should not
pursue self-mortification, which is painful, ignoble, and unbene-
ficial. The Middle Way discovered by the Tathagata avoids both
extremes; giving vision, giving knowledge, it leads to peace, to
direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to Nibbana. 1257 One should
know what it is to extol and what it is to disparage, and know-
ing both, one should neither extol nor disparage but should
teach only the Dhamma. One should know how to define plea-
sure, and knowing that, one should pursue pleasure within one-
self. One should not utter covert speech, and one should not
utter overt sharp speech. One should speak unhurriedly, not
hurriedly. One should not insist on local language, and one
should not override normal usage. This is the summary of the
exposition of non-conflict.

4. '"One should not pursue sensual pleasure, which is low,
vulgar, coarse, ignoble, and unbeneficial; and one should not
pursue self-mortification, which is painful, ignoble, and unbene-
ficial.' So it was said. And with reference to what was this said?

"The pursuit of the enjoyment of one whose pleasure is
linked to sensual desires 1258 - low, vulgar, coarse, ignoble, and
unbeneficial - is a state beset by suffering, vexation, despair.


1080


iii 232


The Exposition of Non-Conflict 1081


and fever, and it is the wrong way. 1259 [231] Disengagement
from the pursuit of the enjoyment of one whose pleasure is
linked to sensual desires - low, vulgar, coarse, ignoble, and
unbeneficial - is a state without suffering, vexation, despair,
and fever, and it is the right way.

"The pursuit of self-mortification - painful, ignoble, and
unbeneficial - is a state beset by suffering, vexation, despair,
and fever, and it is the wrong way. Disengagement from the
pursuit of self-mortification - painful, ignoble, and unbeneficial
- is a state without suffering, vexation, despair, and fever, and it
is the right way.

"So it was with reference to this that it was said: 'One should
not pursue sensual pleasure, which is low, vulgar, coarse, ignoble,
and unbeneficial; and one should not pursue self-mortification,
which is painful, ignoble, and unbeneficial.'

5. "'The Middle Way discovered by the Tathagata avoids both
these extremes; giving vision, giving knowledge, it leads to
peace, to direct knowledge, to enlightenment, to Nibbana.' So it
was said. And with reference to what was this said? It is just this
Noble Eightfold Path; that is, right view, right intention, right
speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindful-
ness, and right concentration. So it was with reference to this
that it was said: ‘The Middle Way discovered by the Tathagata
avoids both these extremes. . .to Nibbana.'

6. "'One should know what it is to extol and what it is to dis-
parage, and knowing both, one should neither extol nor dispar-
age but should teach only the Dhamma.' So it was said. And
with reference to what was this said?

7. "How, bhikkhus, does there come to be extolling and dis-
paraging and failure to teach only the Dhamma? When one says:
'All those engaged in the pursuit of the enjoyment of one whose
pleasure is linked to sensual desires - low. . .and unbeneficial - are
beset by suffering, vexation, despair, and fever, and they have
entered upon the wrong way,' one thus disparages some. When
one says: 'All those disengaged from the pursuit of the enjoyment
of one whose pleasure is linked to sensual desires - low... and
unbeneficial - are without suffering, vexation, despair, and fever,
and they have entered upon the right way,' one thus extols some.

"When one says: 'All those engaged in the pursuit of self-
mortification - painful, ignoble, and unbeneficial - [232] are


iii 233


1082 Aranavibhanga Sutta: Sutta 139


beset by suffering, vexation, despair, and fever, and they have
entered upon the wrong way,' one thus disparages some.
When one says: 'All those disengaged from the pursuit of self-
mortification - painful, ignoble, and unbeneficial - are without
suffering, vexation, despair, and fever, and they have entered
upon the right way,' one thus extols some.

"When one says: 'All those who have not abandoned the fetter
of being 1260 are beset by suffering, vexation, despair, and fever,
and they have entered upon the wrong way/ one thus dispar-
ages some. When one says: 'All those who have abandoned the
fetter of being are without suffering, vexation, despair, and
fever, and they have entered upon the right way,' one thus
extols some. This is how there comes to be extolling and dis-
paraging and failure to teach only the Dhamma.

8. "And how, bhikkhus, does there come to be neither
extolling nor disparaging but teaching only the Dhamma? When
one does not say: 'All those engaged in the pursuit of the enjoy-
ment of one whose pleasure is linked to sensual desires... have
entered upon the wrong way/ but says instead: 'The pursuit is a
state beset by suffering, vexation, despair, and fever, and it is
the wrong way/ then one teaches only the Dhamma. 1261 When
one does not say: 'All those disengaged from the pursuit of the
enjoyment of one whose pleasure is linked to sensual
desires... have entered upon the right way,' but says instead:
'The disengagement is a state without suffering, vexation,
despair, and fever, and it is the right way/ then one teaches only
the Dhamma.

"When one does not say: 'All those engaged in the pursuit of
self-mortification. ..have entered upon the wrong way/ but says
instead: 'The pursuit is a state beset by suffering, vexation,
despair, and fever, and it is the wrong way/ then one teaches
only the Dhamma. When one does not say: 'All those disen-
gaged from the pursuit of self-mortification. . .have entered upon
the right way/ but says instead: 'The disengagement is a state
without suffering, vexation, despair, and fever, and it is the
right way/ then one teaches only the Dhamma.

"When one does not say: 'All those who have not abandoned
the fetter of being... have entered upon the wrong way/ [233]
but says instead: 'As long as the fetter of being is unabandoned,
being too is unabandoned,' then one teaches only the Dhamma.


iii 234


The Exposition of Non-Conflict 1083


When one does not say: 'All those who have abandoned the
fetter of being... have entered upon the right way,' but says
instead: 'When the fetter of being is abandoned, being also is
abandoned/ then one teaches only the Dhamma.

“So it was with reference to this that it was said: 'One should
know what it is to extol aind what it is to disparage, and know-
ing both, one should neither extol nor disparage but should
teach only the Dhamma.'

9. “'One should know how to define pleasure, and knowing
that, one should pursue pleasure within oneself.' So it was said.
And with reference to what was this said?

"Bhikkhus, there are these five cords of sensual pleasure.
What five? Forms cognizable by the eye... sounds cognizable by
the ear... odours cognizable by the nose... flavours cognizable by
the tongue... tangibles cognizable by the body that are wished
for, desired, agreeable, and likeable, connected with sensual
desire and provocative of lust. These are the five cords of sen-
sual pleasure. Now the pleasure and joy that arise dependent on
these five cords of sensual pleasure are called sensual pleasure -
a filthy pleasure, a coarse pleasure, an ignoble pleasure. I say of
this kind of pleasure that it should not be pursued, that it should
not be developed, that it should not be cultivated, and that it
should be feared.

"Here, bhikkhus, quite secluded from sensual pleasures,
secluded from unwholesome states, a bhikkhu enters upon and
abides in the first jhana. ..the second jhana.. .the third jhana...
the fourth jhana. This is called the bliss of renunciation, the bliss
of seclusion, the bliss of peace, the bliss of enlightenment. I say
of this kind of pleasure that it should be pursued, that it should
be developed, that it should be cultivated, and that it should not
be feared. [234]

“So it was with reference to this that it was said: 'One should
know how to define pleasure, and knowing that, one should
pursue pleasure within oneself.'

10. "'One should not utter covert speech, and one should not
utter overt sharp speech.' So it was said. And with reference to
what was this said?

"Here, bhikkhus, when one knows covert speech to be
untrue, incorrect, and unbeneficial, one should on no account
utter it. When one knows covert speech to be true, correct, and


1084 Aranavibhanga Sutta: Sutta 139


iii 235


unbeneficial, one should try not to utter it. But when one knows
covert speech to be true, correct, and beneficial, one may utter it,
knowing the time to do so.

"Here, bhikkhus, when one knows overt sharp speech to be
untrue, incorrect, and unbeneficial, one should on no account
utter it. When one knows overt sharp speech to be true, correct,
and unbeneficial, one should try not to utter it. But when one
knows overt sharp speech to be true, correct, and beneficial, one
may utter it, knowing the time to do so.

"So it was with reference to this that it was said: 'One should not
utter covert speech, and one should not utter overt sharp speech.'

11. "'One should speak unhurriedly, not hurriedly.' So it was
said. And with reference to what was this said?

"Here, bhikkhus, when one speaks hurriedly, one's body
grows tired and one's mind becomes excited, one's voice is
strained and one's throat becomes hoarse, and the speech of one
who speaks hurriedly is indistinct and hard to understand.

"Here, bhikkhus, when one speaks unhurriedly, one's body
does not grow tired nor does one's mind become excited, one's
voice is not strained nor does one's throat become hoarse, and
the speech of one who speaks unhurriedly is distinct and easy to
understand.

"So it was with reference to this that it was said: 'One should
speak unhurriedly, not hurriedly.'

12. "'One should not insist on local language, and one should
not override normal usage.' So it was said. And with reference
to what was this said?

"How, bhikkhus, does there come to be insistence on local lan-
guage and overriding of normal usage? Here, bhikkhus, in dif-
ferent localities they call the same thing a 'dish' [pati], [235] a
'bowl' [patta], a 'vessel' [vittha], a 'saucer' [serava], a 'pan' [dhar-
opa], a 'pot' [pona], a 'mug' [hana] or a 'basin' [pislla]. So what-
ever they call it in such and such a locality, one speaks accord-
ingly, firmly adhering [to that expression] and insisting: 'Only
this is correct; anything else is wrong.' This is how there comes to
be insistence on local language and overriding normal usage. 1262

"And how, bhikkhus, does there come to be non-insistence on
local language and non-overriding of normal usage? Here,
bhikkhus, in different localities they call the same thing a
'dish'... or a 'basin.' So whatever they call it in such and such a


iii 236


The Exposition of Non-Conflict 1085


locality, without adhering [to that expression] one speaks
accordingly, thinking: "These venerable ones, it seems, are speak-
ing with reference to this.' This is how there comes to be non-
insistence on local language and non-overriding of normal usage.

"So it was with reference to this that it was said: 'One should
not insist on local language, and one should not override nor-
mal usage.'

13. "Here, bhikkhus, the pursuit of the enjoyment of one
whose pleasure is linked to sensual desires - low... and unbene-
ficial - is a state beset by suffering, vexation, despair, and fever,
and it is the wrong way. Therefore this is a state with conflict.

"Here, bhikkhus, disengagement from the pursuit of the
enjoyment of one whose pleasure is linked to sensual desires -
low... and unbeneficial - is a state without suffering, vexation,
despair, and fever, and it is the right way. Therefore this is a
state without conflict.

"Here, bhikkhus, the pursuit of self-mortification - painful,
ignoble, and unbeneficial - is a state beset by suffering, vexa-
tion, despair, and fever, and it is the wrong way. Therefore this
is a state with conflict.

"Here, bhikkhus, disengagement from the pursuit of self-
mortification - painful, ignoble, and unbeneficial - is a state
without suffering, vexation, despair, and fever, and it is the
right way. [236] Therefore this is a state without conflict.

"Here, bhikkhus, the Middle Way discovered by the
Tathagata avoids both these extremes; giving vision, giving
knowledge, it leads to peace, to direct knowledge, to enlighten-
ment, to Nibbana. It is a state without suffering... and it is the
right way. Therefore this is a state without conflict.

"Here, bhikkhus, extolling and disparaging and failure to
teach only the Dhamma is a state beset by suffering... and it is
the wrong way. Therefore this is a state with conflict.

"Here, bhikkhus, not extolling and not disparaging and teach-
ing only the Dhamma is a state without suffering... and it is the
right way. Therefore this is a state without conflict.

"Here, bhikkhus, sensual pleasure - a filthy pleasure, a coarse
pleasure, an ignoble pleasure - is a state beset by suffering. . .and
it is the wrong way. Therefore this is a state with conflict.

"Here, bhikkhus, the bliss of renunciation, the bliss of seclu-
sion, the bliss of peace, the bliss of enlightenment, is a state


iii 237


1086 Aranavibhanga Sutta: Sutta 139


without suffering... and it is the right way. Therefore this is a
state without conflict.

"Here, bhikkhus, covert speech that is untrue, incorrect, and
unbeneficial is a state beset by suffering... Therefore this is a
state with conflict.

"Here, bhikkhus, covert speech that is true, correct, and
unbeneficial is a state beset by suffering... Therefore this is a
state with conflict.

"Here, bhikkhus, covert speech that is true, correct, and bene-
ficial is a state without suffering... Therefore this is a state with-
out conflict.

"Here, bhikkhus, overt sharp speech that is untrue, incorrect,
and unbeneficial is a state beset by suffering. . .Therefore this is a
state with conflict.

"Here, bhikkhus, overt sharp speech that is true, correct, and
unbeneficial is a state beset by suffering... Therefore this is a
state with conflict.

"Here, bhikkhus, overt sharp speech [237] that is true, correct,
and beneficial is a state without suffering... Therefore this is a
state without conflict.

"Here, bhikkhus, the speech of one who speaks hurriedly is a
state beset by suffering, vexation, despair, and fever, and it is
the wrong way. Therefore this is a state with conflict.

"Here, bhikkhus, the speech of one who speaks unhurriedly is a
state without suffering. . .Therefore this is a state without conflict.

"Here, bhikkhus, insistence on local language and overriding
of normal usage is a state beset by suffering. . .Therefore this is a
state with conflict.

"Here, bhikkhus, non-insistence on local language and non-
overriding of normal usage is a state without suffering, vexa-
tion, despair, and fever, and it is the right way. Therefore this is
a state without conflict.

14. "Therefore, bhikkhus, you should train yourselves thus:
'We shall know the state with conflict and we shall know the
state without conflict, and knowing these, we shall enter upon
the way without conflict.' Now, bhikkhus, Subhuti is a clansman
who has entered upon the way without conflict." 1263

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


140 Dhatuvibhanga Sutta
The Exposition of the Elements


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was
wandering in the Magadhan country and eventually arrived at
Rajagaha. There he went to the potter Bhaggava and said to him:

2. "If it is not inconvenient for you, Bhaggava, I will stay one
night in your workshop."

"It is not inconvenient for me, venerable sir, but there is a
homeless one already staying there. If he agrees, then stay as
long as you like, venerable sir." [238]

3. Now there was a clansman named Pukkusati who had gone
forth from the home life into homelessness out of faith in the
Blessed One, and on that occasion he was already staying in the
potter's workshop. 1264 Then the Blessed One went to the vener-
able Pukkusati and said to him: "If it is not inconvenient for
you, bhikkhu, I will stay one night in the workshop."

"The potter's workshop is large enough, friend. 1265 Let the
venerable one stay as long as he likes."

4. Then the Blessed One entered the potter's workshop, pre-
pared a spread of grass at one end, and sat down, folding his
legs crosswise, setting his body erect, and establishing mindful-
ness in front of him. Then the Blessed One spent most of the
night seated [in meditation], and the venerable Pukkusati also
spent most of the night seated [in meditation]. Then the Blessed
One thought: "This clansman conducts himself in a way that
inspires confidence. Suppose I were to question him." So he
asked the venerable Pukkusati:

5. "Under whom have you gone forth, bhikkhu? Who is your
teacher? Whose Dhamma do you profess?" 1266

"Friend, there is the recluse Gotama, the son of the Sakyans
who went forth from a Sakyan clan. Now a good report of that
Blessed Gotama has been spread to this effect: 'That Blessed One


1087


in 239


1088 Dhatuvibhanga Sutta: Sutta 140


is accomplished, fully enlightened, perfect in true knowledge
and conduct, sublime, knower of worlds, incomparable leader of
persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, enlightened,
blessed.' I have gone forth under that Blessed One; that Blessed
One is my teacher; I profess the Dhamma of that Blessed One."

"But, bhikkhu, where is that Blessed One, accomplished and
fully enlightened, now living?"

"There is, friend, a city in the northern country named
Savatthl. The Blessed One, accomplished and fully enlightened,
is now living there."

"But, bhikkhu, have you ever seen that Blessed One before?
Would you recognise him if you saw him?" [239]

"No, friend, I have never seen that Blessed One before, nor
would I recognise him if I saw him."

6. Then the Blessed One thought: "This clansman has gone forth
from the home life into homelessness under me. Suppose I were to
teach him the Dhamma." So the Blessed One addressed the vener-
able Pukkusati thus: "Bhikkhu, I will teach you the Dhamma.
Listen and attend closely to what I shall say." - "Yes, friend,"
the venerable Pukkusati replied. The Blessed One said this:

7. "Bhikkhu, this person consists of six elements, six bases of
contact, and eighteen kinds of mental exploration, and he has
four foundations. 1267 The tides of conceiving do not sweep over
one who stands upon these [foundations], and when the tides of
conceiving no longer sweep over him he is called a sage at
peace. One should not neglect wisdom, should preserve truth,
should cultivate relinquishment, and should train for peace.
This is the summary of the exposition of the six elements.

8. "'Bhikkhu, this person consists of six elements/ 1268 So it was
said. And with reference to what was this said? There are the
earth element, the water element, the fire element, the air ele-
ment, the space element, and the consciousness element. So it
was with reference to this that it was said: 'Bhikkhu, this person
consists of six elements.'

9. "'Bhikkhu, this person consists of six bases of contact.' So it
was said. And with reference to what was this said? There are
the base of eye-contact, the base of ear-contact, the base of nose-
contact, the base of tongue-contact, the base of body-contact, and
the base of mind-contact. So it was with reference to this that it
was said: 'Bhikkhu, this person consists of six bases of contact.'


iii 240


The Exposition of the Elements 1089


10. "'Bliikkhu, this person consists of eighteen kinds of mental
exploration.' 1269 So it was said. And with reference to what was
this said? On seeing a form with the eye, one explores a form
productive of joy, one explores a form productive of grief, one
explores a form productive of equanimity. On hearing a sound
with the ear. . .[240] On smelling an odour with the nose. . .On tast-
ing a flavour with the tongue... On touching a tangible with the
body. . .On cognizing a mind-object with the mind, one explores a
mind-object productive of joy, one explores a mind-object pro-
ductive of grief, one explores a mind-object productive of equa-
nimity. So it was with reference to this that it was said: 'Bhikkhu,
this person consists of eighteen kinds of mental exploration.'

11. "'Bhikkhu, this person has four foundations.' So it was
said. And with reference to what was this said? There are the
foundation of wisdom, the foundation of truth, the foundation
of relinquishment, and the foundation of peace. 1270 So it was
with reference to this that it was said: 'Bhikkhu, this person has
four foundations.'

12. "'One should not neglect wisdom, should preserve truth,
should cultivate relinquishment, and should train for peace.' 1271
So it was said. And with reference to what was this said?

13. "How, bhikkhu, does one not neglect wisdom? 1272 There
are these six elements: the earth element, the water element, the
fire element, the air element, the space element, and the con-
sciousness element.

14. "What, bhikkhu, is the earth element? The earth element
may be either internal or external. What is the internal earth ele-
ment? Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is solid, solidi-
fied, and clung-to, that is, head-hairs, body-hairs, nails, teeth,
skin, flesh, sinews, bones, bone-marrow, kidneys, heart, liver,
diaphragm, spleen, lungs, large intestines, small intestines, con-
tents of the stomach, feces, or whatever else internally, belong-
ing to oneself, is solid, solidified, and clung-to: this is called the
internal earth element. Now both the internal earth element and
the external earth element are simply earth element. And that
should be seen as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: "This is
not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.' When one sees it thus
as it actually is with proper wisdom, one becomes disenchanted
with the earth element and makes the mind dispassionate
towards the earth element.


1090 Dhatuvibhanga Sutta: Sutta 140


iii 241


15. "What, bhikkhu, is the water element? The water element
may be either [241] internal or external. What is the internal
water element? Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is
water, watery, and clung-to, that is, bile, phlegm, pus, blood,
sweat, fat, tears, grease, spittle, snot, oil-of-the-joints, urine, or
whatever else internally, belonging to oneself, is water, watery,
and clung-to: this is called the internal water element. Now both
the internal water element and the external water element are
simply water element. And that should be seen as it actually is
with proper wisdom thus: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is
not my self.' When one sees it thus as it actually is with proper
wisdom, one becomes disenchanted with the water element and
makes the mind dispassionate towards the water element.

16. "What, bhikkhu, is the fire element? The fire element may
be either internal or external. What is the internal fire element?
Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is fire, fiery, and
clung-to, that is, that by which one is warmed, ages, and is con-
sumed, and that by which what is eaten, drunk, consumed, and
tasted gets completely digested, or whatever else internally,
belonging to oneself, is fire, fiery, and clung-to: this is called the
internal fire element. Now both the internal fire element and the
external fire element are simply fire element. And that should be
seen as it actually is with proper wisdom thus: "This is not mine,
this I am not, this is not my self/ When one sees it thus as it
actually is with proper wisdom, one becomes disenchanted with
the fire element and makes the mind dispassionate towards the
fire element.

17. "What, bhikkhu, is the air element? The air element may be
either internal or external. What is the internal air element?
Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is air, airy, and clung-
to, that is, up-going winds, down-going winds, winds in the
belly, winds in the bowels, winds that course through the limbs,
in-breath and out-breath, or whatever else internally, belonging
to oneself, is air, airy, and clung-to: this is called the internal air
element. Now both the internal air element and the external air
element are simply air element. And that should be seen as it
actually is with proper wisdom thus: "This is not mine, this I am
not, this is not my self.' When one sees it thus as it actually is
with proper wisdom, one becomes disenchanted with the air ele-
ment and makes the mind dispassionate towards the air element.



iii 242


The Exposition of the Elements 1091


18. "What, bhikkhu, is the space element? The space element
may be either internal or external. What is the internal [242]
space element? Whatever internally, belonging to oneself, is
space, spatial, and clung-to, that is, the holes of the ears, the nos-
trils, the door of the mouth, and that [aperture] whereby what is
eaten, drunk, consumed, and tasted gets swallowed, and where it
collects, and whereby it is excreted from below, or whatever else
internally, belonging to oneself, is space, spatial, and clung-to:
this is called the internal space element. Now both the internal
space element and the external space element are simply space
element. And that should be seen as it actually is with proper
wisdom thus: "This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.'
When one sees it thus as it actually is with proper wisdom, one
becomes disenchanted with the space element and makes the
mind dispassionate towards the space element.

19. "Then there remains only consciousness, purified and
bright. 1273 What does one cognize with that consciousness?
One cognizes: '[This is] pleasant'; one cognizes: '[This is]
painful'; one cognizes: '[This is] neither-painful-nor-pleasant.'
In dependence on a contact to be felt as pleasant there arises a
pleasant feeling. 1274 When one feels a pleasant feeling, one
understands: 'I feel a pleasant feeling.' One understands:
'With the cessation of that same contact to be felt as pleasant,
its corresponding feeling - the pleasant feeling that arose in
dependence on that contact to be felt as pleasant - ceases and
subsides.' In dependence on a contact to be felt as painful there
arises a painful feeling. When one feels a painful feeling, one
understands: 'I feel a painful feeling.' One understands: 'With
the cessation of that same contact to be felt as painful, its corre-
sponding feeling - the painful feeling that arose in dependence on
that contact to be felt as painful - ceases and subsides.' In depen-
dence on a contact to be felt as neither-painful-nor-pleasant there
arises a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling. When one feels a
neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, one understands: 'I feel a
neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling.' One understands: 'With
the cessation of that same contact to be felt as neither-painful-
nor-pleasant, its corresponding feeling - the neither-painful-
nor-pleasant feeling that arose in dependence on that contact to
be felt as neither-painful-nor-pleasant - ceases and subsides.'
Bhikkhu, just as from the contact and friction of two fire-sticks


1092 Dhatuvibhanga Sutta: Sutta 140


iii 244


heat is generated and fire is produced, and with the separation
and disjunction of these two fire-sticks the corresponding heat
ceases and subsides; so too, [243] in dependence on a contact to
be felt as pleasant... to be felt as painful... to be felt as neither-
painful-nor-pleasant there arises a neither-painful-nor-pleasant
feeling... One understands: 'With the cessation of that same
contact to be felt as neither-painful-nor-pleasant, its corre-
sponding feeling... ceases and subsides.'

20. "Then there remains only equanimity, purified and bright,
malleable, wieldy, and radiant. 1275 Suppose, bhikkhu, a skilled
goldsmith or his apprentice were to prepare a furnace, heat up
the crucible, take some gold with tongs, and put it into the cru-
cible. From time to time he would blow on it, from time to time
he would sprinkle water over it, and from time to time he would
just look on. That gold would become refined, well refined,
completely refined, faultless, rid of dross, malleable, wieldy, and
radiant. Then whatever kind of ornament he wished to make
from it, whether a golden chain or earrings or a necklace or a
golden garland, it would serve his purpose. So too, bhikkhu,
then there remains only equanimity, purified and bright, mal-
leable, wieldy, and radiant.

21. "He understands thus: 'If I were to direct this equanimity,
so purified and bright, to the base of infinite space and to develop
my mind accordingly, then this equanimity of mine, supported
by that base, clinging to at, would remain for a very long time. 1276
If I were to direct this equanimity, so purified and bright, to the
base of infinite consciousness... [244]... to the base of nothing-
ness... to the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception and
to develop my mind accordingly, then this equanimity of mine,
supported by that base, clinging to it, would remain for a very
long time.'

22. "He understands thus: 'If I were to direct this equanimity,
so purified and bright, to the base of infinite space and to devel-
op my mind accordingly, this would be conditioned. 1277 If I
were to direct this equanimity, so purified and bright, to the
base of infinite consciousness... to the base of nothingness... to
the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception and to devel-
op my mind accordingly, this would be conditioned.' He does
not form any condition or generate any volition tending
towards either being or non-being. 1278 Since he does not form


iii 245


The Exposition of the Elements 1093


any condition or generate any volition tending towards either
being or non-being, he does not cling to anything in this world.
When he does not cling, he is not agitated. When he is not agi-
tated, he personally attains Nibbana. He understands thus: 'Birth
is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done
has been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.' 1279

23. "If he feels a pleasant feeling, 1280 he understands: 'It is
impermanent; there is no holding to it; there is no delight in it.'
If he feels a painful feeling, he understands: 'It is impermanent;
there is no holding to it; there is no delight in it.' If he feels a
neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, he understands: 'It is
impermanent; there is no holding to it; there is no delight in it.'

24. "If he feels a pleasant feeling, he feels it detached; if he
feels a painful feeling, he feels it detached; if he feels a neither-
painful-nor-pleasant feeling, he feels it detached. When he feels
a feeling terminating with the body, he understands: 'I feel a
feeling terminating with the body.' [245] When he feels a feeling
terminating with life, he understands: 'I feel a feeling terminating
with life.' 1281 He understands: 'On the dissolution of the body,
with the ending of life, all that is felt, not being delighted in, will
become cool right here.' 1282 Bhikkhu, just as an oil-lamp bums in
dependence on oil and a wick, and when the oil and wick are
used up, if it does not get any more fuel, it is extinguished from
lack of fuel; so too when he feels a feeling terminating with the
body... a feeling terminating with life, he understands: 'I feel a
feeling terminating with life.' He understands: 'On the dissolu-
tion of the body, with the ending of life, all that is felt, not being
delighted in, will become cool right here.'

25. "Therefore a bhikkhu possessing [this wisdom] possesses
the supreme foundation of wisdom. For this, bhikkhu, is the
supreme noble wisdom, namely, the knowledge of the destruc-
tion of all suffering. 1283

26. "His deliverance, being founded upon truth, is unshake-
able. For that is false, bhikkhu, which has a deceptive nature,
and that is true which has an undeceptive nature - Nibbana.
Therefore a bhikkhu possessing [this truth] possesses the
supreme foundation of truth. For this, bhikkhu, is the supreme
noble truth, namely, Nibbana, which has an undeceptive nature.

27. "Formerly, when he was ignorant, he acquired and devel-
oped attachments; 1284 now he has abandoned them, cut them


iii 246


1094 Dhatuvibhanga Sutta: Sutta 140


off at the root, made them like a palm stump, done away with
them so that they are no longer subject to future arising.
Therefore a bhikkhu possessing [this relinquishment] possesses
the supreme foundation of relinquishment. For this, bhikkhu, is
the supreme noble relinquishment, namely, the relinquishing of
all attachments.

28. "Formerly, when he was ignorant, he experienced cov-
etousness, desire, and lust; now he has abandoned them, cut
them off at the root, made them like a palm stump, done away
with them so that they are no longer subject to future arising.
Formerly, when he was ignorant, he experienced anger, ill will,
and hate; now he has abandoned them, cut them off at the root,
made them like a palm stump, done away with them so that
they are no longer subject to future arising. Formerly, when he
was ignorant, he experienced ignorance and delusion; now he
has abandoned them, cut them off [246] at the root, made them
like a palm stump, done away with them so that they are no
longer subject to future arising. Therefore a bhikkhu possessing
[this peace] possesses the supreme foundation of peace. For this,
bhikkhu, is the supreme noble peace, namely, the pacification of
lust, hate, and delusion.

29. "So it was with reference to this that it was said: 'One
should not neglect wisdom, should preserve truth, should culti-
vate relinquishment, and should train for peace.'

30. "'The tides of conceiving do not sweep over one who
stands upon these [foundations], and when the tides of conceiv-
ing no longer sweep over him he is called a sage at peace.' 1285 So
it was said. And with reference to what was this said?

31. "Bhikkhu, 'I am' is a conceiving; 'I am this' is a conceiving;
'I shall be' is a conceiving; 'I shall not be' is a conceiving; 'I shall
be possessed of form' is a conceiving; 'I shall be formless' is a
conceiving; 'I shall be percipient' is a conceiving; 'I shall be non-
percipient' is a conceiving; 'I shall be neither-percipient-nor-non-
percipient' is a conceiving. Conceiving is a disease, conceiving is
a tumour, conceiving is a dart. By overcoming all conceivings,
bhikkhu, one is called a sage at peace. And the sage at peace is
not bom, does not age, does not die; he is not shaken and is not
agitated. For there is nothing present in him by which he might
be bom. 1286 Not being born, how could he age? Not ageing, how


iii 247


The Exposition of the Elements 1095


could he die? Not dying, how could he be shaken? Not being
shaken, why should he be agitated?

32. "So it was with reference to this that it was said: 'The tides
of conceiving do not sweep over one who stands upon these
[foundations], and when the tides of conceiving no longer
sweep over him he is called a sage at peace.' Bhikkhu, bear in
mind this brief exposition of the six elements."

33. Thereupon the venerable Pukkusati thought: "Indeed, the
Teacher has come to me! The Sublime One has come to me! The
Fully Enlightened One has come to me!" Then he rose from his
seat, arranged his upper robe over one shoulder, and prostrat-
ing himself with his head at the Blessed One's feet, he said:
"Venerable sir, a transgression overcame me, in that like a fool,
confused [247] and blundering, I presumed to address the
Blessed One as 'friend.' Venerable sir, may the Blessed One for-
give my transgression seen as such for the sake of restraint in
the future."

"Surely, bhikkhu, a transgression overcame you, in that like a
fool, confused and blundering, you presumed to address me as
'friend.' But since you see your transgression as such and make
amends in accordance with the Dhamma, we forgive you. For it
is growth in the Noble One's Discipline when one sees one's
transgression as such, makes amends in accordance with the
Dhamma, and undertakes restraint in the future."

34. "Venerable sir, I would receive the full admission under
the Blessed One."

"But are your bowl and robes complete, bhikkhu?"

"Venerable sir, my bowl and robes are not complete."

"Bhikkhu, Tathagatas do not give the full admission to anyone
whose bowl and robes are not complete."

35. Then the venerable Pukkusati, having delighted and
rejoiced in the Blessed One's words, rose from his seat, and after
paying homage to the Blessed One, keeping him on his right, he
departed in order to search for a bowl and robes. Then, while
the venerable Pukkusati was searching for a bowl and robes, a
stray cow killed him.

36. Then a number of bhikkhus went to the Blessed One, and
after paying homage to him, they sat down at one side and told
him: "Venerable sir, the clansman Pukkusati, who was given


1096 Dhatuvibhanga Sutta: Sutta 140


iii 247


brief instruction by the Blessed One, has died. What is his desti-
nation? What is his future course?"

"Bhikkhus, the clansman Pukkusati was wise. He practised in
accordance with the Dhamma and did not trouble me in the
interpretation of the Dhamma. With the destruction of the five
lower fetters, the clansman Pukkusati has reappeared sponta-
neously [in the Pure Abodes] and will attain final Nibbana there
without ever returning from that world." 1287

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.



141 Saccavibhanga Sutta
The Exposition of the Truths


[248] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One
was living at Benares in the Deer Park at Isipatana. There he
addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "At Benares, bhikkhus, in the Deer Park at Isipatana the
Tathagata, accomplished and fully enlightened, set rolling the
matchless Wheel of the Dhamma, 1288 which cannot be stopped
by any recluse or brahmin or god or Mara or Brahma or anyone
in the world - that is, the announcing, teaching, describing,
establishing, revealing, expounding, and exhibiting of the Four
Noble Truths. Of what four?

3. "The announcing, teaching, describing, establishing, reveal-
ing, expounding, and exhibiting of the noble truth of suffering.
The announcing, teaching, describing, establishing, revealing,
expounding, and exhibiting of the noble truth of the origin of
suffering... of the noble truth of the cessation of suffering... of
the noble truth of the way leading to the cessation of suffering.

4. "At Benares, bhikkhus, in the Deer Park at Isipatana the
Tathagata, accomplished and fully enlightened, set rolling the
matchless Wheel of the Dhamma, which cannot be stopped by any
recluse or brahmin or god or Mara or Brahma or anyone in the
world - that is, the announcing, teaching, describing, establishing,
revealing, expounding, and exhibiting of these Four Noble Truths.

5. "Cultivate the friendship of Sariputta and Moggallana,
bhikkhus; associate with Sariputta and Moggallana. They are
wise and helpful to their companions in the holy life. Sariputta is
like a mother; Moggallana is like a nurse. Sariputta trains others
for the fruit of stream-entry, Moggallana for the supreme
goal. 1289 Sariputta, bhikkhus, is able to announce, teach, describe,
establish, reveal, expound, and exhibit the Four Noble Truths."


1097


iii 250


109B S accavibhanga Sutta: Sutta 141


6. So the Blessed One said. Having said this, the Sublime One
rose from his seat and went into his dwelling. [249]

7. Then, soon after the Blessed One had gone, the venerable
Sariputta addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Friends, bhikkhus." -
"Friend," the bhikkhus replied to the venerable Sariputta. The
venerable Sariputta said this:

8. "At Benares, friends, in the Deer Park at Isipatana the
Tathagata, accomplished and fully enlightened, set rolling the
matchless Wheel of the Dhamma...and exhibiting of the Four
Noble Truths. Of what four?

9. "The announcing... and exhibiting of the noble truth of suf-
fering... of the noble truth of the origin of suffering... of the
noble truth of the cessation of suffering... of the noble truth of
the way leading to the cessation of suffering.

10. "And what, friends, is the noble truth of suffering? Birth is
suffering; ageing is suffering; death is suffering; sorrow, lamen-
tation, pain, grief, and despair are suffering; not to obtain what
one wants is suffering; in short, the five aggregates affected by
clinging are suffering.

11. "And what, friends, is birth? 1290 The birth of beings into
the various orders of beings, their coming to birth, precipitation
[in a womb], generation, the manifestation of the aggregates,
obtaining the bases for contact - this is called birth.

12. "And what, friends, is ageing? The ageing of beings in the
various orders of beings, their old age, brokenness of teeth,
greyness of hair, wrinkling of skin, decline of life, weakness of
faculties - this is called ageing.

13. "And what, friends, is death? The passing of beings out of
the various orders of beings, their passing away, dissolution,
disappearance, dying, completion of time, dissolution of aggre-
gates, laying down of the body - this is called death.'

14. "And what, friends, is sorrow? The sorrow, sorrowing,
sorrowfulness, inner sorrow, inner sorriness, of one who has
encountered some misfortune or is affected by some painful
state - this is called sorrow.

15. "And what, friends, is lamentation? The wail and lament,
wailing and lamenting, [250] bewailing and lamentation, of one
who has encountered some misfortune or is affected by some
painful state - this is called lamentation.


iii 251


The Exposition of the Truths 1099


16. "And what, friends, is pain? Bodily pain, bodily discom-
fort, painful, uncomfortable feeling born of bodily contact - this
is called pain.

17. "And what, friends, is grief? Mental pain, mental discom-
fort, painful, uncomfortable feeling bom of mental contact - this
is called grief.

18. "And what, friends, is despair? The trouble and despair,
the tribulation and desperation, of one who has encountered
some misfortune or is affected by some painful state - this is
called despair.

19. "And what, friends, is 'not to obtain what one wants is suf-
fering'? To beings subject to birth there comes the wish: 'Oh,
that we were not subject to birth! That birth would not come to
us!' But this is not to be obtained by wishing, and not to obtain
what one wants is suffering. To beings subject to ageing... sub-
ject to sickness... subject to death... subject to sorrow, lamenta-
tion, pain, grief, and despair, there comes the wish: 'Oh, that we
were not subject to sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair!
That sorrow, lamentation, pain, grief, and despair would not
come to us!' But this is not to be obtained by wishing, and not to
obtain what one wants is suffering.

20. "And what, friends, are the five aggregates affected by
clinging that, in short, are suffering? They are: the material form
aggregate affected by clinging, the feeling aggregate affected by
clinging, the perception aggregate affected by clinging, the for-
mations aggregate affected by clinging, and the consciousness
aggregate affected by clinging. These are the five aggregates
affected by clinging that, in short, are suffering. This is called the
noble truth of suffering.

21. "And what, friends, is the noble truth of the origin of suf-
fering? It is craving, which brings renewal of being, is accompa-
nied by delight and lust, and delights in this and that; that is,
craving for sensual pleasures, craving for being, [251] and crav-
ing for non-being. This is called the noble truth of the origin of
suffering.

22. "And what, friends, is the noble truth of the cessation of suf-
fering? It is the remainderless fading away and ceasing, the
giving up, relinquishing, letting go, and rejecting of that same
craving. This is called the noble truth of the cessation of suffering.


1100 Saccavibhanga Suita: Suita 141


iii 252


23. "And what, friends, is the noble truth of the way leading
to the cessation of suffering? It is just this Noble Eightfold
Path; that is, right view, right intention, right speech, right
action, right livelihood, right effort, right mindfulness, and
right concentration.

24. "And what, friends, is right view? Knowledge of suffering,
knowledge of the origin of suffering, knowledge of the cessation
of suffering, and knowledge of the way leading to the cessation
of suffering - this is called right view.

25. "And what, friends, is right intention? Intention of renun-
ciation, intention of non-ill will, and intention of non-cruelty -
this is called right intention.

26. "And what, friends, is right speech? Abstaining from false
speech, abstaining from malicious speech, abstaining from
harsh speech, and abstaining from idle chatter - this is called
right speech.

27. "And what, friends, is right action? Abstaining from
killing living beings, abstaining from taking what is not given,
and abstaining from misconduct in sensual pleasures - this is
called right action.

28. "And what, friends, is right livelihood? Here a noble disci-
ple, having abandoned wrong livelihood, earns his living by
right livelihood - this is called right livelihood.

29. "And what, friends, is right effort? Here a bhikkhu awak-
ens zeal for the non-arising of unarisen evil unwholesome states,
and he makes effort, arouses energy, exerts his mind, and
strives. He awakens zeal for the abandoning of arisen evil
unwholesome states, and he makes effort, arouses energy, exerts
his mind, and strives. He awakens zeal for the arising of
unarisen wholesome states, [252] and he makes effort, arouses
energy, exerts his mind, and strives. He awakens zeal for the
continuance, non-disappearance, strengthening, increase, and
fulfilment by development of arisen wholesome states, and he
makes effort, arouses energy, exerts his mind, and strives. This
is called right effort.

30. "And what, friends, is right mindfulness? Here a bhikkhu
abides contemplating the body as a body, ardent, fully aware,
and mindful, having put away covetousness and grief for the
world. He abides contemplating feelings as feelings, ardent,
fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness and


iii 252


The Exposition of the Truths 1101


grief for the world. He abides contemplating mind as mind,
ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put away covetousness
and grief for the world. He abides contemplating mind-objects
as mind-objects, ardent, fully aware, and mindful, having put
away covetousness and grief for the world. This is called right
mindfulness.

31. "And what, friends, is right concentration? Here, quite
secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from unwholesome
states, a bhikkhu enters upon and abides in the first jhana, which
is accompanied by applied and sustained thought, with rapture
and pleasure bom of seclusion. With the stilling of applied and
sustained thought, he enters upon and abides in the second
jhana, which has self-confidence and singleness of mind without
applied and sustained thought, with rapture and pleasure born
of concentration. With the fading away as well of rapture, he
abides in equanimity, and mindful and fully aware, still feeling
pleasure with the body, he enters upon and abides in the third
jhana, on account of which noble ones announce: 'He has a
pleasant abiding who has equanimity and is mindful.' With the
abandoning of pleasure and pain, and with the previous disap-
pearance of joy and grief, he enters upon and abides in the fourth
jhana, which has neither-pain-nor-pleasure and purity of mind-
fulness due to equanimity. This is called right concentration.

"This is called the noble truth of the way leading to the cessa-
tion of suffering.

32. "At Benares, friends, in the Deer Park at Isipatana the
Tathagata, accomplished and fully enlightened, set rolling the
matchless Wheel of the Dhamma, which cannot be stopped by
any recluse or brahmin or god or Mara or Brahma or anyone in
the world - that is, the announcing, teaching, describing, estab-
lishing, revealing, expounding, and exhibiting of these Four
Noble Truths."

That is what the venerable Sariputta said. The bhikkhus were
satisfied and delighted in the venerable Sariputta's words.


142 Dakkhinavibhanga Sutta
The Exposition of Offerings


[253] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was
living in the Sakyan country at Kapilavatthu in Nigrodha's Park.

2. Then Mahapajapatl GotamI took a new pair of cloths and
went to the Blessed One. 1291 After paying homage to him, she
sat down at one side and said to the Blessed One: "Venerable sir,
this new pair of cloths has been spun by me, woven by me,
especially for the Blessed One. Venerable sir, let the Blessed One
accept it from me out of compassion."

When this was said, the Blessed One told her: "Give it to the
Sangha, GotamI. When you give it to the Sangha, the offering
will be made both to me and to the Sangha." 1292

A second time and a third time she said to the Blessed One:
"Venerable sir,. . .accept it from me out of compassion."

A second time and a third time the Blessed One told her:
"Give it to the Sangha, GotamI. When you give it to the Sangha,
the offering will be made both to me and to the Sangha."

3. Then the venerable Ananda said to the Blessed One:
"Venerable sir, let the Blessed One accept the new pair of cloths
from Mahapajapatl GotamI. Mahapajapatl GotamI has been very
helpful to the Blessed One, venerable sir. As his mother's sister,
she was his nurse, his foster mother, the one who gave him milk.
She suckled the Blessed One when his own mother died. The
Blessed One too has been very helpful to Mahapajapatl GotamI,
venerable sir. It is owing to the Blessed One that Mahapajapatl
GotamI has gone for refuge to the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the
Sangha. It is owing to the Blessed One that Mahapajapatl GotamI
abstains from killing living beings, from taking what is not given,
from misconduct in sensual pleasures, from false speech, and
from wine, liquor, and intoxicants, which are the basis of negli-
gence. It is owing to the Blessed One that Mahapajapatl GotamI


1102


iii 255


The Exposition of Offerings 1103


possesses perfect confidence in the Buddha, the Dhamma, and
the Sangha, and that she possesses [254] the virtues loved by
noble ones. 1293 It is owing to the Blessed One that Mahapajapatl
GotamI is free from doubt about suffering, about the origin of
suffering, about the cessation of suffering, and about the way
leading to the cessation of suffering. Tire Blessed One has been
very helpful to Mahapajapatl GotamI."

4. "That is so, Ananda, that is so! When one person, owing to
another, has gone for refuge to the Buddha, the Dhamma, and
the Sangha, I say that it is not easy for the former to repay the
latter by paying homage to him, rising up for him, according
him reverential salutation and polite services, and by providing
robes, almsfood, resting places, and medicinal requisites.

"When one person, owing to another, has come to abstain
from killing living beings, from taking what is not given, from
misconduct in sensual pleasures, from false speech, and from
wine, liquor, and intoxicants, which are the basis of negligence, I
say that it is not easy for the former to repay the latter by paying
homage to him. . .and medicinal requisites.

"When one person, owing to another, has come to possess
perfect confidence in the Buddha, the Dhamma, and the Sangha,
and to possess the virtues loved by noble ones, I say that it is not
easy for the former to repay the latter by paying homage to
him. . .and medicinal requisites.

"When one person, owing to another, has become free from
doubt about suffering, about the origin of suffering, about the
cessation of suffering, and about the way leading to the cessa-
tion of suffering, I say that it is not easy for the former to repay
the latter by paying homage to him. . .and medicinal requisites.

5. "There are fourteen kinds of personal offerings, Ananda. 1294
One gives a gift to the Tathagata, accomplished and fully
enlightened; this is the first kind of personal offering. One gives
a gift to a paccekabuddha; this is the second kind of personal
offering. One gives a gift to an arahant disciple of the Tathagata;
this is the third kind of personal offering. One gives a gift to one
who has entered upon the way to the realisation of the fruit of
arahantship; this is the fourth kind of personal offering. One
gives a gift to a non-returner; this is the fifth kind of personal
offering. [255] One gives a gift to one who has entered upon the
way to the realisation of the fruit of non-return; this is the sixth


iii 255


1104 Dakkhinavibhanga Sutta: Sutta 142


kind of personal offering. One gives a gift to a once-retumer;
this is the seventh kind of personal offering. One gives a gift to
one who has entered upon the way to the realisation of the fruit
of once-return; this is the eighth kind of personal offering. One
gives a gift to a stream-enterer; this is the ninth kind of personal
offering. One gives a gift to one who has entered upon the way
to the realisation of the fruit of stream-entry; 1295 this is the tenth
kind of personal offering. One gives a gift to one outside [the
Dispensation] who is free from lust for sensual pleasures; 1296
this is the eleventh kind of personal offering. One gives a gift to
a virtuous ordinary person; this is the twelfth kind of personal
offering. One gives a gift to an immoral ordinary person; this is
the thirteenth kind of personal offering. One gives a gift to an
animal; this is the fourteenth kind of personal offering.

6. "Herein, Ananda, by giving a gift to an animal, the offer-
ing may be expected to repay a hundredfold. 1297 By giving a
gift to an immoral ordinary person, the offering may be
expected to repay a thousandfold. By giving a gift to a virtu-
ous ordinary person, the offering may be expected to repay a
hundred-thousandfold. By giving a gift to one outside [the
Dispensation] who is free from lust for sensual pleasures, the
offering may be expected to repay a hundred-thousand times
a hundred-thousandfold.

"By giving a gift to one who has entered upon the way to the
realisation of the fruit of stream-entry, the offering may be ex-
pected to repay incalculably, immeasurably. What, then, should
be said about giving a gift to a stream-enterer? What should be
said about giving a gift to one who has entered upon the way to
the realisation of the fruit of once-return... to a once-returner...to
one who has entered upon the way to the realisation of the fruit
of non-return. . .to a non-returner. . .to one who has entered upon
the way to the realisation of the fruit of arahantship...to an ara-
hant...to a paccekabuddha? What should be said about giving a
gift to a Tathagata, accomplished and fully enlightened? 1298

7. "There are seven kinds of offerings made to the Sangha,
Ananda. One gives a gift to a Sangha of both [bhikkhus and
bhikkhurus] headed by the Buddha; this is the first kind of offer-
ing made to the Sangha. 1299 One gives a gift to a Sangha of both
[bhikkhus and bhikkhurus] after the Tathagata has attained final
Nibbana; this is the second kind of offering made to the Sangha.


iii 257


The Exposition of Offerings 1105


One gives a gift to a Sangha of bhikkhus; this is the third kind of
offering made to the Sangha. One gives a gift to a Sangha of
bhikkhunls; this is the fourth kind of offering made to the
Sangha. One gives a gift, saying: 'Appoint so many bhikkhus
and bhikkhunls for me from the Sangha'; [256] this is the fifth
kind of offering made to the Sangha. One gives a gift, saying:
'Appoint so many bhikkhus for me from the Sangha'; this is the
sixth kind of offering made to the Sangha. One gives a gift, say-
ing: 'Appoint so many bhikkhunls for me from the Sangha'; this
is the seventh kind of offering made to the Sangha.

8. “In future times, Ananda, there will be members of the dan
who are 'yellow-necks/ immoral, of evil character. 1300 People
will give gifts to those immoral persons for the sake of the
Sangha. Even then, I say, an offering made to the Sangha is
incalculable, immeasurable. 1301 And I say that in no way does a
gift to a person individually ever have greater fruit than an
offering made to the Sangha. 1302

9. “There are four kinds of purification of offering. What four?
There is the offering that is purified by the giver, not by the
receiver. 1303 There is the offering that is purified by the receiver,
not by the giver. There is the offering that is purified neither by
the giver nor by the receiver. There is the offering that is puri-
fied both by the giver and by the receiver.

10. "And what is the offering that is purified by the giver, not
by the receiver? Here the giver is virtuous, of good character,
and the receiver is immoral, of evil character. Thus the offering
is purified by the giver, not by the receiver.

11. "And what is the offering that is purified by the receiver,
not by the giver? Here the giver is immoral, of evil character,
and the receiver is virtuous, of good character. Thus the offering
is purified by the receiver, not by the giver.

12. "And what is the offering that is purified neither by the
giver nor by the receiver? Here the giver is immoral, of evil
character, and the receiver is immoral, of evil character. Thus
the offering is purified neither by the giver nor by the receiver.

13. "And what is the offering that is purified both by the giver
and by the receiver? Here the giver is virtuous, of good charac-
ter, and the receiver is virtuous, of good character. [257] Thus
the offering is purified both by the giver and by the receiver.
These are the four kinds of purification of offering."


1106 Dakkhinavibhanga Sutta: Sutta 142


iii 25 7


14. That is what the Blessed One said. When the Sublime One
had said that, the Teacher said further:

"When a virtuous person to an immoral person gives
With trusting heart a gift righteously obtained.

Placing faith that the fruit of action is great.

The giver's virtue purifies the offering.

When an immoral person to a virtuous person gives
With untrusting heart a gift unrighteously obtained.

Nor places faith that the fruit of action is great.

The receiver's virtue purifies the offering.

When an immoral person to an immoral person gives
With untrusting heart a gift unrighteously obtained.

Nor places faith that the fruit of action is great,

Neither's virtue purifies the offering.

When a virtuous person to a virtuous person gives
With trusting heart a gift righteously obtained.

Placing faith that the fruit of action is great,

That gift, I say, will come to full fruition.

When a passionless person to a passionless person gives
With trusting heart a gift righteously obtained.

Placing faith that the fruit of action is great.

That gift, I say, is the best of worldly gifts." 1304


5

The Division of the Sixfold Base

(Salayatanavagga)



143 Anathapindikovada Sutta
Advice to Anathapindika


[258] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One
was living at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika' s Park.

2. Now on that occasion the householder Anathapindika was
afflicted, suffering, and gravely ill. Then he addressed a certain
man thus: "Come, good man, go to the Blessed One, pay
homage in my name with your head at his feet, and say:
'Venerable sir, the householder Anathapindika is afflicted, suf-
fering, and gravely ill; he pays homage with his head at the
Blessed One's feet.' Then go to the venerable Sariputta, pay
homage in my name with your head at his feet, and say: 'Vener-
able sir, the householder Anathapindika is afflicted, suffering,
and gravely ill; he pays homage with his head at the venerable
Sariputta's feet.' Then say: 'It would be good, venerable sir, if
the venerable Sariputta would come to the residence of the
householder Anathapindika, out of compassion.'"

"Yes, sir," the man replied, and he went to the Blessed One,
and after paying homage to the Blessed One, he sat down at one
side and delivered his message. Then he went to the venerable
Sariputta, and after paying homage to the venerable Sariputta,
he delivered his message, saying: "It would be good, venerable
sir, if the venerable Sariputta would come to the residence of the
householder Anathapindika, out of compassion." The venerable
Sariputta consented in silence.

3. Then the venerable Sariputta dressed, and taking his bowl
and outer robe, went to the residence of the householder
Anathapindika with the venerable Ananda as his attendant.
Having gone there, [259] he sat down on a seat made ready and
said to the householder Anathapindika: "I hope you are getting
well, householder, I hope you are comfortable. I hope your


1109


iii 260


1110 Anathapindikovada Sutta: Sutta 143


painful feelings are subsiding and not increasing, and that their
subsiding, not their increase, is apparent."

4. "Venerable Sariputta, I am not getting well, I am not com-
fortable. My painful feelings are increasing, not subsiding; their
increase and not their subsiding is apparent. Just as if a strong
man were splitting my head open with a sharp sword, so too,
violent winds cut through my head. I am not getting well... Just
as if a strong man were tightening a tough leather strap around
my head as a headband, so too, there are violent pains in my
head. I am not getting well... Just as if a skilled butcher or his
apprentice were to carve up an ox's belly with a sharp butcher's
knife, so too, violent winds are carving up my belly. I am not
getting well... Just as if two strong men were to seize a weaker
man by both arms and roast him over a pit of hot coals, so too,
there is a violent burning in my body. I am not getting well, I
am not comfortable. My painful feelings are increasing, not sub-
siding; their increase and not their subsiding is apparent."

5. "Then, householder, you should train thus: 'I will not cling
to the eye, and my consciousness will not be dependent on the
eye.' 1305 Thus you should train. You should train thus: 'I will not
cling to the ear... I will not cling to the nose... I will not cling to
the tongue... I will not cling to the body. ..I will not cling to the
mind, and my consciousness will not be dependent on the
mind.' Thus you should train.

6. "Householder, you should train thus:- 'I will not cling to
forms... I will not cling to sounds... I will not cling to odours... I
will not cling to flavours. ..I will not cling to tangibles. ..I will
not cling to mind-objects, and my consciousness will not be
dependent on mind-objects.' Thus you should train.

7. "Householder, you should train thus: 'I will not cling to
eye-consciousness... I will not cling to ear-consciousness... I will
not cling to nose-consciousness... I will not cling to tongue-
consciousness... I will not cling to body-consciousness... I will
not cling to mind-consciousness, and my consciousness will not
be dependent on mind-consciousness.' Thus you should train.

8. "Householder, you should train thus: 'I will not cling to
eye-con tact... [260]... I will not cling to ear-contact... I will not
cling to nose-contact... I will not cling to tongue-contact... I will
not cling to body-contact... I will not cling to mind-contact, and


iii 261


Advice to Anathapindika 1111


my consciousness will not be dependent on mind-contact.' Thus
you should train.

9. “Householder, you should train thus: 'I will not cling to
feeling born of eye-contact... I will not cling to feeling born of
ear-contact... I will not cling to feeling born of nose-contact... I
will not cling to feeling bom of tongue-contact... I will not cling
to feeling born of body-contact... I will not cling to feeling bom
of mind-contact, and my consciousness will not be dependent
on feeling born of mind-contact.' Thus you should train.

10. "Householder, you should train thus: 'I will not cling to the
earth element... I will not cling to the water element... I will not
cling to the fire element... I will not cling to the air element... I
will not cling to the space element... I will not cling to the con-
sciousness element, and my consciousness will not be dependent
on the consciousness element.' Thus you should train.

11. "Householder, you should train thus: 'I will not cling to
material form... I will not cling to feeling... I will not cling to
perception... I will not cling to formations... I will not cling to
consciousness, and my consciousness will not be dependent on
consciousness.' Thus you should train.

12. "Householder, you should train thus: 'I will not cling to
the base of infinite space... I will not cling to the base of infinite
consciousness... I will not cling to the base of nothingness
[261] . . .1 will not cling to the base of neither-perception-nor-non-
perception, and my consciousness will not be dependent on the
base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.' Thus you
should train.

13. "Householder, you should train thus: 'I will not cling to
this world, and my consciousness will not be dependent on this
world. I will not cling to the world beyond, and my conscious-
ness will not be dependent on the world beyond.' Thus yfm
should train.

14. "Householder, you should train thus: 'I will not cling to
what is seen, heard, sensed, cognized, encountered, sought after,
and examined by the mind, and my consciousness will not be
dependent on that.' Thus you should train."

15. When this was said, the householder Anathapindika wept
and shed tears. Then the venerable Ananda asked him: "Are
you foundering, householder, are you sinking?"


iii 262


1112 Anathapindikovada Sutta: Sutta 143


"1 am not foundering, venerable Ananda, I am not sinking.
But although I have long waited upon the Teacher and bhik~
khus worthy of esteem, never before have I heard such a talk on
the Dhamma."

"Such talk on the Dhamma, householder, is not given to lay
people clothed in white. Such talk on the Dhamma is given to
those who have gone forth." 1306

"Well then, venerable Sariputta, let such talk on the Dhamma
be given to lay people clothed in white. There are clansmen with
little dust in their eyes who are wasting away through not hear-
ing [such talk on] the Dhamma. There will be those who will
understand the Dhamma."

16. Then, after giving the householder Anathapindika this
advice, the venerable Sariputta and the venerable Ananda rose
from their seats and departed. Soon after they had left, [262]
the householder Anathapindika died and reappeared in the
Tusita heaven.

17. Then, when the night was well advanced, Anathapindika,
now a young god of beautiful appearance, went to the Blessed
One, illuminating the whole of Jeta's Grove. After paying
homage to the Blessed One, he stood at one side and addressed
the Blessed One in stanzas:

"Oh blessed is this Jeta's Grove,

Dwelt in by the sagely Sangha,

Wherein resides the King of Dhamma,

The fount of all my happiness.

By action, knowledge and Dhamma,

By virtue and noble way of life -
By these are mortals purified.

Not by lineage or wealth.

Therefore a wise person who sees
What truly leads to his own good.

Should investigate the Dhamma
And purify himself with it.

Sariputta has reached the peak
In virtue, peace, and wisdom's ways;


iii 263


Advice to Anathapindika 1113


Any bhikkhu who has gone beyond

At best can only equal him."

18. That is what the young god Anathapindika said, and the
Teacher approved. Then the young god Anathapindika, think-
ing: "The Teacher has approved of me," paid homage to the
Blessed One, and keeping him on his right, he vanished at once.

19. When the night had ended, the Blessed One addressed the
bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus, last night when the night was well
advanced, there came to me a certain young god of beautiful
appearance who illuminated the whole of J eta's Grove. After
paying homage to me, he stood at one side and addressed me in
stanzas thus:

'Oh blessed is this Jeta's Grove. . .

At best can only equal him.' [263]

That is what the young god said. Then the young god, thinking:
'The Teacher has approved of me,' paid homage to me, and
keeping me on his right, he vanished at once."

20. When this was said, the venerable Ananda said to the
Blessed One: "Surely, venerable sir, that young god must have
been Anathapindika. For the householder Anathapindika had
perfect confidence in the venerable Sariputta."

"Good, good, Ananda! You have deduced the right conclu-
sion. That young god was Anathapindika, no one else."

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Ananda was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


144 Channovada Sutta
Advice to Channa


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Rajagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels' Sanctuary.

2. Now on that occasion the venerable Sariputta, the venerable
Maha Cunda, and the venerable Channa were living on the
mountain Vulture Peak.

3. On that occasion the venerable Channa was afflicted, suffer-
ing, and gravely ill. Then, when it was evening, the venerable
Sariputta rose from meditation, went to the venerable Maha
Cunda, and said to him: "Friend Cunda, let us go to the vener-
able Channa and ask about his illness." - "Yes, friend," the vener-
able Maha Cunda replied.

4. Then the venerable Sariputta and the venerable Maha
Cunda went to the venerable Channa and exchanged greetings
with him. When [264] this courteous and amiable talk was fin-
ished, they sat down at one side and the venerable Sariputta
said to the venerable Channa: "I hope you are getting well,
friend Channa, I hope you are comfortable. I hope your painful
feelings are subsiding and not increasing, and that their subsid-
ing, not their increase, is apparent."

5. "Friend Sariputta, I am not getting well, I am not comfort-
able. My painful feelings are increasing, not subsiding;... (as
Sutta 143, §4 )... their increase and not their subsiding is apparent.
I shall use the knife, 1307 friend Sariputta; I have no desire to live."

6. "Let the venerable Channa not use the knife. Let the vener-
able Channa live. We want the venerable Channa to live. If he
lacks suitable food, I will go in search of suitable food for him. If
he lacks suitable medicine, I will go in search of suitable medi-
cine for him. If he lacks a proper attendant, I will attend on him.
Let the venerable Channa not use the knife. Let the venerable
Channa live. We want the venerable Channa to live."


1114


iii 266


Advice to Channa 1115


7. "Friend Sariputta, it is not that I have no suitable food and
medicine or no proper attendant. But rather, friend Sariputta,
the Teacher has long been worshipped by me with love, not
without love; for it is proper for the disciple to worship the
Teacher with love, not without love. Friend Sariputta, remember
this: the bhikkhu Channa will use the knife blamelessly." 1308

8. "We would ask the venerable Channa certain questions, if
the venerable Channa finds it opportune to reply."

"Ask, friend Sariputta. When I have heard, I shall know."

9. "Friend Channa, do you regard the eye, eye-consciousness,
and things cognizable [by the mind] through eye-consciousness
thus: 'This is mine, this I am, [265] this is my self'? Do you
regard the ear. ..the nose. ..the tongue. ..the body. ..the mind,
mind-consciousness, and things cognizable [by the mind]
through mind-consciousness thus: 'This is mine, this I am, this is
my self'?"

"Friend Sariputta, I regard the eye, eye-consciousness, and
things cognizable [by the mind] through eye-consciousness
thus: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self.' I
regard the ear... the nose... the tongue... the body... the mind,
mind-consciousness, and things cognizable [by the mind]
through mind-consciousness thus: 'This is not mine, this I am
not, this is not my self.'"

10. "Friend Channa, what have you seen, what have you
directly known in the eye, in eye-consciousness, and in things
cognizable [by the mind] through eye-consciousness, that you
regard them thus: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my
self'? What have you seen, what have you directly known in the
ear. ..in the nose. ..in the tongue. ..in the body.. .in the mind, in
mind-consciousness, and in things cognizable [by the mind]
through mind-consciousness, that you regard them thus: "This is
not mine, this I am not, this is not my self'?"

"Friend Sariputta, it is through seeing cessation, through
directly knowing cessation in the eye, in eye-consciousness, and
in things cognizable [by the mind] through eye-consciousness,
that I regard them thus: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is
not my self.' It is through seeing cessation, through directly
knowing cessation in the ear... in the nose... in the tongue... in
the body... in the mind, in mind-consciousness, and in things
cognizable [by the mind] through mind-consciousness, [266]


1116 Channovada Sutta: Sutta 144


iii 266


that I regard them thus: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is
not my self."'

11. When this was said, the venerable Maha Cunda said to the
venerable Channa: 1309 "Therefore, friend Channa, this instruc-
tion of the Blessed One's is to be constantly given attention:
'There is wavering in one who is dependent, there is no waver-
ing in one who is independent; when there is no wavering, there
is tranquillity; when there is tranquillity, there is no bias; when
there is no bias, there is no coming and going; when there is no
coming and going, there is no passing away and reappearing;
when there is no passing away and reappearing, there is no here
nor beyond nor in between. This is the end of suffering.'" 1310

12. Then when the venerable Sariputta and the venerable
Maha Cunda had advised the venerable Channa thus, they rose
from their seats and went away. Then, soon after they had gone,
the venerable Channa used the knife. 1311

13. Then the venerable Sariputta went to the Blessed One, and
after paying homage to him, he sat down at one side and said to
the Blessed One: "Venerable sir, the venerable Channa has used
the knife. What is his destination, what is his future course?"

"Sariputta, didn't the bhikkhu Channa declare to you his
blamelessness?" 1312

"Venerable sir, there is a Vajjian village called Pubbajira. There
the venerable Channa had families that were his friends, families
that were his intimates, families that were blameworthy." 1313

"There are those families that were friends of the bhikkhu
Channa, Sariputta, families that were his intimates, families that
were blameworthy; but I do not say that to this extent he was
blameworthy. Sariputta, when one lays down this body and
clings to a new body, then I say one is blameworthy. There was
none of that in the bhikkhu Channa; the bhikkhu Channa used
the knife blamelessly." 1314

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Sariputta was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


145 Punnovada Sutta
Advice to Purina


[267] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was
livirtg at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. Then,
when it was evening, the venerable Punna rose from meditation
and went to the Blessed One. 1315 After paying homage to the
Blessed One, he sat down at one side and said to him:

2. "Venerable sir, it would be good if the Blessed One would
give me brief advice. Having heard the Dhamma from the Blessed
One, I will abide alone, withdrawn, diligent, ardent, and resolute."

"Well then, Punna, listen and attend carefully to what I shall say."

"Yes, venerable sir," the venerable Punna replied. The Blessed
One said this:

3. "Punna, there are forms cognizable by the eye that are
wished for, desired, agreeable, and likeable, connected with sen-
sual desire and provocative of lust. If a bhikkhu delights in
them, welcomes them, and remains holding to them, delight
arises in him. With the arising of delight, Punna, there is the aris-
ing of suffering, I say. 1316 There are, Punna, sounds cognizable
by the ear... odours cognizable by the nose... flavours cognizable
by the tongue... tangibles cognizable by the body... mind-objects
cognizable by the mind that are wished for, desired, agreeable,
and likeable, connected with sensual desire [268] and provoca-
tive of lust. If a bhikkhu delights in them, welcomes them, and
remains holding to them, delight arises in him. With the arising
of delight, Punna, there is the arising of suffering, I say.

4. "Punna, there are forms cognizable by the eye... sounds
cognizable by the ear .. .odours cognizable by the nose. . .flavours
cognizable by the tongue... tangibles cognizable by the body...
mind-objects cognizable by the mind that are wished for,
desired, agreeable, and likeable, connected with sensual desire
and provocative of lust. If a bhikkhu does not delight in them.


1117


iii 269


1118 Punnovada Sutta: Sutta 145


welcome them, and remain holding to them, delight ceases in
him. With the cessation of delight, Punna, there is the cessation
of suffering, I say.

5. "Now that I have given you this brief advice, Punna, in
which country will you dwell?"

"Venerable sir, now that the Blessed One has given me this
brief advice, I am going to dwell in the Sunaparanta country."

"Punna, the people of Sunaparanta are fierce and rough. If
they abuse and threaten you, what will you think then?"

"Venerable sir, if the people of Sunaparanta abuse and threat-
en me, then I shall think: 'These people of Sunaparanta are kind,
truly kind, in that they did not give me a blow with the fist.'
Then I shall think thus. Blessed One; then I shall think thus.
Sublime One."

"But, Punna, if the people of Sunaparanta do give you a blow
with the fist, what will you think then?"

"Venerable sir, if the people of Sunaparanta do give me a
blow with the fist, then I shall think: 'These people of Suna-
paranta are kind, truly kind, in that they did not give me a blow
with a clod.' Then I shall think thus. Blessed One; then I shall
think thus. Sublime One."

"But, Punna, if the people of Sunaparanta do give you a blow
with a clod, what will you think then?"

"Venerable sir, if the people of Sunaparanta do give me a
blow with a clod, then I shall think: 'These people of Sunapa-
ranta are kind, truly kind, in that they did not give me a blow
with a stick.' Then I shall think thus. Blessed One; then I shall
think thus. Sublime One." [269]

"But, Punna, if the people of Sunaparanta do give you a blow
with a stick, what will you think then?"

"Venerable sir, if the people of Sunaparanta do give me a
blow with a stick, then I shall think: 'These people of Suna-
paranta are kind, truly kind, in that they did not give me a blow
with a knife.' Then I shall think thus. Blessed One; then I shall
think thus, Sublime One."

"But, Punna, if the people of Sunaparanta do give you a blow
with a knife, what will you think then?"

"Venerable sir, if the people of Sunaparanta do give me a
blow with a knife, then I shall think: 'These people of Suna-
paranta are kind, truly kind, in that they have not taken my life


iii 270


Advice to Purina 1119


with a sharp knife.' Then I shall think thus. Blessed One; then I
shall think thus, Sublime One." .

"But, Punna, if the people of Sunaparanta do take your life
with a sharp knife, what will you think then?"

"Venerable sir, if the people of Sunaparanta do take my life
with a sharp knife, then I shall think thus: 'There have been dis-
ciples of the Blessed One who, being humiliated and disgusted
by the body and by life, sought to have their lives deprived by
the knife. But I have had my life deprived by the knife without
seeking for it.' Then I shall think thus. Blessed One; then I shall
think thus, Sublime One."

6. "Good, good, Punna! Possessing such self-control and
peacefulness, you will be able to dwell in the Sunaparanta coun-
try. Now, Punna, it is time to do as you think fit."

7. Then, having delighted and rejoiced in the Blessed One's
words, the venerable Punna rose from his seat, and after paying
homage to the Blessed One, departed keeping him on his right.
He then set his resting place in order, took his bowl and outer
robe, and set out to wander towards the Sunaparanta country.
Wandering by stages, he eventually arrived in the Sunaparanta
country, and there he lived. Then, during that Rains, the venera-
ble Purina established five hundred men lay followers and five
hundred women lay followers in the practice, and he himself
realised the three true knowledges. On a later occasion, the ven-
erable Punna attained final Nibbana. 1317

8. Then a number of bhikkhus went to the Blessed One, and
after paying homage to him, they sat down at one side and told
him: "Venerable sir, the clansman Punna, who [270] was given
brief advice by the Blessed One, has died. What is his destina-
tion? What is his future course?"

"Bhikkhus, the clansman Punna was wise. He practised in
accordance with the Dhamma and did not trouble me in the
interpretation of the Dhamma. The clansman Punna has
attained final Nibbana."

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


146 Nandakovada Sutta
Advice from Nandaka


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park.

2. Then Mahapajapatl GotamI together with five hundred
bhikkhunls went to the Blessed One. After paying homage to
the Blessed One, she stood at one side and said to him:
“Venerable sir, let the Blessed One advise the bhikkhunls, let the
Blessed One instruct the bhikkhunls, let the Blessed One give
the bhikkhunls a talk on the Dhamma."

3. Now on that occasion the elder bhikkhus were taking turns
in advising the bhikkhunls, but the venerable Nandaka did not
want to advise them when his turn came. 1318 Then the Blessed
One addressed the venerable Ananda: “Ananda, whose turn is it
today to advise the bhikkhunls?"

"Venerable sir, it is the venerable Nandaka's turn to advise the
bhikkhunls, but he does, not want to advise them even though it
is his turn."

4. Then the Blessed One addressed the venerable Nandaka:
"Advise the bhikkhunls, Nandaka. Instruct the bhikkhunls,
Nandaka. Give the bhikkhunls a talk on the Dhamma, brahmin."

"Yes, venerable sir," [271] the venerable Nandaka replied.
Then, in the morning, the venerable Nandaka dressed, and tak-
ing his bowl and outer robe, went into SavatthI for alms. When
he had wandered for alms in SavatthI and had returned from his
almsround, after his meal he went with a companion to the
Rajaka Park. The bhikkhunls saw the venerable Nandaka com-
ing in the distance and prepared a seat and set out water for the
feet. The venerable Nandaka sat down on the seat made ready
and washed his feet. The bhikkhunls paid homage to him and
sat down at one side. When they were seated, the venerable
Nandaka told the bhikkhunls:


1120


iii 273


Advice from Nandaka 1121


5. "Sisters, this talk will be in the form of questions. When you
understand you should say: 'We understand'; when you do not
understand you should say: 'We do not understand’; when you
are doubtful or perplexed you should ask me: 'How is this,
venerable sir? What is the meaning of this?'"

"Venerable sir, we are satisfied and pleased with the master
Nandaka for inviting us in this way."

6. "Sisters, what do you think? Is the eye permanent or imper-
manent?" - "Impermanent, venerable sir." - "Is what is imper-
manent suffering or happiness?" - "Suffering, venerable sir." -
"Is what is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change fit to
be regarded thus: 'This is mine, this I am, this is my self'?" -
"No, venerable sir."

"Sisters, what do you think? Is the ear. ..the nose. ..the
tongue. ..the body. ..the mind permanent or impermanent?" -
"Impermanent, venerable sir." - "Is what is impermanent suf-
fering or happiness?" - "Suffering, venerable sir." - "Is what is
impermanent, suffering, [272] and subject to change fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, this I am, this is my self'?" - "No,
venerable sir. Why is that? Because, venerable sir, we have
already seen this well as it actually is with proper wisdom thus:
'These six internal bases are impermanent.'" 1319

"Good, good, sisters! So it is with a noble disciple who sees
this as it actually is with proper wisdom.

7. "Sisters, what do you think? Are forms... sounds... odours...
flavours. ..tangibles. ..mind-objects permanent or imperma-
nent?" - "Impermanent, venerable sir." - "Is what is imperma-
nent suffering or happiness?" - "Suffering, venerable sir." - "Is
what is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change fit to be
regarded thus: 'This is mine, this I am, this is my self'?" - "No,
venerable sir. Why is that? Because, venerable sir, we have
already seen this well as it actually is with proper wisdom thus:
'These six external bases are impermanent.'"

"Good, good, sisters! So it is with a noble disciple who sees
this as it actually is with proper wisdom.

8. "Sisters, what do you think? Is eye-consciousness... [273]... ear-
consciousness. . .nose-consciousness. . .tongue-consciousness. . .
body-consciousness... mind-consciousness permanent or imper-
manent?" - "Impermanent, venerable sir." - "Is what is
impermanent suffering or happiness?" - "Suffering, venerable


1122 NandakovadaSutta: Sutta 146


iii 274


sir." - "Is what is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change
fit to be regarded thus: 'This is mine, this I am, this is my self'?"
- "No, venerable sir. Why is that? Because, venerable sir, we
have already seen this well as it actually is with proper wisdom
thus: 'These six classes of consciousness are impermanent.'"

"Good, good, sisters! So it is with a noble disciple who sees
this as it actually is with proper wisdom.

9. "Sisters, suppose an oil-lamp is burning: its oil is imperma-
nent and subject to change, its wick is impermanent and subject
to change, its flame is impermanent and subject to change, and
its radiance is impermanent and subject to change. Now would
anyone be speaking rightly who spoke thus: 'While this oil-lamp
is burning, its oil, wick, and flame are impermanent and subject
to change, but its radiance is permanent, everlasting, eternal, not
subject to change'?"

"No, venerable sir. Why is that? Because, venerable sir, while
that oil-lamp is burning, its oil, wick, and flame are imperma-
nent and subject to change, so its radiance must be impermanent
and subject to change."

"So too, sisters, would anyone be speaking rightly who spoke
thus: 'These six internal bases are impermanent and subject to
change, but the pleasant, painful, or neither-painful-nor-pleasant
feeling that one experiences in dependence upon the six internal
bases is permanent, everlasting, eternal, not subject to change'?"

"No, venerable sir. Why is that? Because each feeling arises in
dependence upon its corresponding condition, 1320 [274] and with
the cessation of its corresponding condition, the feeling ceases."

"Good, good, sisters! So it is with a noble disciple who sees
this as it actually is with proper wisdom.

10. "Sisters, suppose a great tree is standing possessed of
heartwood: its root is impermanent and subject to change, its
trunk is impermanent and subject to change, its branches and
foliage are impermanent and subject to change, and its shadow
is impermanent and subject to change. Now would anyone be
speaking rightly who spoke thus: 'The root, trunk, branches,
and foliage of this great tree standing possessed of heartwood
are impermanent and subject to change, but its shadow is per-
manent, everlasting, eternal, not subject to change'?"

"No, venerable sir. Why is that? Because, venerable sir, the
root, trunk, branches, and foliage of this great tree standing


Advice from Nandaka 1123


possessed of heartwood are impermanent and subject to change,
so its shadow must be impermanent and subject to change."

"So too, sisters, would anyone be speaking rightly who spoke
thus: 'These six external bases are impermanent and subject to
change, but the pleasant, painful, or neither-painful-nor-pleasant
feeling that one experiences in dependence upon the six external
bases is permanent, everlasting, eternal, not subject to change’?"

"No, venerable sir. Why is that? Because each feeling arises in
dependence upon its corresponding condition, and with the ces-
sation of its corresponding condition, the feeling ceases."

"Good, good, sisters! So it is with a noble disciple who sees
this as it actually is with proper wisdom.

11. "Sisters, suppose a skilled butcher or his apprentice were
to kill a cow and carve it up with a sharp butcher's knife.
Without damaging the inner mass of flesh and without damag-
ing the outer hide, he would cut, sever, and carve away the
inner tendons, sinews, and ligaments with the sharp butcher's
knife. [275] Then having cut, severed, and carved all this away,
he would remove the outer hide and cover the cow again with
that same hide. Would he be speaking rightly if he were to say:
'This cow is joined to this hide just as it was before'?"

"No, venerable sir. Why is that? Because if that skilled butcher
or his apprentice were to kill a cow... and cut, sever, and carve
all that away, even though he covers the cow again with that
same hide and says: 'This cow is joined to this hide just as it was
before,' that cow would still be disjoined from that hide."

12. "Sisters, I have given this simile in order to convey a
meaning. This is the meaning: 'The inner mass of flesh' is a term
for the six internal bases. 'The outer hide' is a term for the six
external bases. 'The inner tendons, sinews, and ligaments' is a
term for delight and lust. 'The sharp butcher's knife' is a term
for noble wisdom - the noble wisdom that cuts, severs, and
carves away the inner defilements, fetters, and bonds.

13. "Sisters, there are these seven enlightenment factors 1321
through the development and cultivation of which a bhikkhu,
by realising for himself with direct knowledge, here and now
enters upon and abides in the deliverance of mind and deliver-
ance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of the
taints. What are the seven? Here, sisters, a bhikkhu develops
the mindfulness enlightenment factor, which is supported by


1124 NandakovadaSutta: Sutta 146


iii 277


seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, and ripens in relinquish-
ment. He develops the investigation-of-states enlightenment fac-
tor. . .the energy enlightenment factor. . .the rapture enlightenment
factor... the tranquillity enlightenment factor... the concentration
enlightenment factor... the equanimity enlightenment factor,
which is supported by seclusion, dispassion, and cessation, and
ripens in relinquishment. These are the seven enlightenment fac-
tors through the development and cultivation of which a
bhikkhu, by realising for himself with direct knowledge, here
and now enters upon and abides in the deliverance of mind and
deliverance by wisdom that are taintless with the destruction of
the taints." [276]

14. When the venerable Nandaka had advised the bhikkhunls
thus, he dismissed them, saying: "Go, sisters, it is time." Then
the bhikkhunls, having delighted and rejoiced in the venerable
Nandaka's words, rose from their seats, and after paying
homage to the venerable Nandaka, departed keeping him on
their right. They went to the Blessed One, and after paying
homage to him, stood at one side. The Blessed One told them:
"Go, sisters, it is time." Then the bhikkhunls paid homage to the
Blessed One and departed keeping him on their right.

15. Soon after they had left, the Blessed One addressed the
bhikkhus: "Bhikkhus, just as on the Uposatha day of the four-
teenth people are not doubtful or perplexed as to whether the
moon is incomplete or full, since then the moon is clearly incom-
plete, so too, those bhikkhunls are satisfied with Nandaka's teach-
ing of the Dhamma, but their intention has not yet been fulfilled."

16-26. Then the Blessed One addressed the venerable
Nandaka: "Well then, Nandaka, tomorrow too you should
advise those bhikkhunls in exactly the same way."

"Yes, venerable sir," the venerable Nandaka replied. Then, the
next morning, the venerable Nandaka dressed... (repeat verbatim
§§4-14 above, as far as) [277]... Then the bhikkhunls paid homage
to the Blessed One and departed keeping him on their right.

27. Soon after they had left, the Blessed One addressed the
bhikkhus: "Bhikkhus, just as on the Uposatha day of the fif-
teenth people are not doubtful or perplexed as to whether the
moon is incomplete or full, since then the moon is clearly full, so
too, those bhikkhunls are satisfied with Nandaka's teaching of
the Dhamma and their intention has been fulfilled. Bhikkhus,


iii 277


Advice from Nandaka 1125


even the least advanced of those five hundred bhikkhunls is a
stream-enterer, no longer subject to perdition, bound [for deliv-
erance], headed for enlightenment." 1322

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


147 Cularahulovada Sutta
The Shorter Discourse of
Advice to Rahula


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at Savatthl in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. 1323

2. Then, while the Blessed One was alone in meditation, a
thought arose in his mind thus: "The states that ripen in deliver-
ance have ripened in Rahula. 1324 Suppose I were to lead him on
further to the destruction of the taints."

Then, when it was morning, the Blessed One dressed, and tak-
ing his bowl and outer robe, went into Savatthl for alms. When he
had walked for alms in Savatthl and had returned from his alms-
round, after his meal he addressed the venerable Rahula thus:

"Take your sitting cloth with you, Rahula; let us go to the
Blind Men's Grove [278] to pass the day."

"Yes, venerable sir," the venerable Rahula replied, and tak-
ing his sitting cloth with him, he followed close behind the
Blessed One.

Now on that occasion many thousands of deities followed the
Blessed One, thinking: "Today the Blessed One will lead the
venerable Rahula further to the destruction of the taints." 1325
Then the Blessed One went into the Blind Men's Grove and sat
down at the root of a certain tree on a seat made ready. And the
venerable Rahula paid homage to the Blessed One and sat down
at one side. The Blessed One then said to the venerable Rahula:

3. "Rahula, what do you think? Is the eye permanent or imper-
manent?" - "Impermanent, venerable sir." - "Is what is imper-
manent suffering or happiness?" - "Suffering, venerable sir/' -
"Is what is impermanent, suffering, and subject to change fit to
be regarded thus: 'This is mine, this I am, this is my self'?" -
"No, venerable sir."

"Rahula, what do you think? Are forms... Is eye-consciousness


1126


iii 280


The Shorter Discourse of Advice to Rahula 1127


...[279]. ..Is eye-contact... Are any feeling, any perception, any
formations, any consciousness that arise with eye-contact as
condition permanent or impermanent?" 1326 - "Impermanent,
venerable sir." - "Is what is impermanent suffering or happi-
ness?" - "Suffering, venerable sir." - "Is what is impermanent,
suffering, and subject to change fit to be regarded thus: 'This is
mine, this I am, this is my self'?" - "No, venerable sir."

4-8. "Rahula, what do you think? Is the ear permanent or
impermanent?... Is the nose permanent or impermanent?... Is the
tongue permanent or impermanent? . . .Is the body permanent or
impermanent?... Are mind-objects... Is mind-consciousness... Is
mind-contact... Are any feeling, any perception, any formations,
any consciousness that arise with mind-contact as condition per-
manent or impermanent?" - "Impermanent, venerable sir." - "Is
what is impermanent suffering or happiness?" - "Suffering,
venerable sir." - "Is what is impermanent, suffering, and subject
to change fit to be regarded thus: 'This is mine, this I am, this is
my self'?" - "No, venerable sir."

9. "Seeing thus, Rahula, a well-taught noble disciple becomes
disenchanted with the eye, disenchanted with forms, disen-
chanted with eye-consciousness, disenchanted with eye-contact,
and disenchanted with any feeling, any perception, any forma-
tions, any consciousness that arise with eye-contact as condition.

"He becomes disenchanted with the ear... He becomes disen-
chanted with the nose... He becomes disenchanted with the
tongue... He becomes disenchanted with the body... He becomes
disenchanted with the mind, disenchanted with mind-objects,
disenchanted with mind-consciousness, disenchanted with mind-
contact, [280] and disenchanted with any feeling, any perception,
any formations, any consciousness that arise with mind-contact
as condition.

10. "Being disenchanted, he becomes dispassionate. Through
dispassion [his mind] is liberated. When it is liberated there
comes the knowledge: 'It is liberated.' He understands: 'Birth is
destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what had to be done has
been done, there is no more coming to any state of being.'"

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Rahula was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words. Now



1128 Cularcihulovada Sutta: Sutta 147 iii 280


while this discourse was being spoken, through not clinging
the venerable Rahula's mind was liberated from the taints.
And in those many thousands of deities there arose the spot-
less immaculate vision of the Dhamma: "All that is subject to
arising is subject to cessation." 1327


148 Chachakka Sutta
The Six Sets of Six


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There he
addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, I shall teach you the Dhamma that is good in the
beginning, good in the middle, and good in the end, with the
right meaning and phrasing; I shall reveal a holy life that is
utterly perfect and pure, 1328 that is, the six sets of six. Listen and
attend closely to what I shall say." - "Yes, venerable sir," the
bhikkhus replied. The Blessed One said this:

(synopsis)

3. "The six internal bases should be understood. The six external
bases should be understood. The six classes of consciousness
should be understood. The six classes of contact should be
understood. The six classes of feeling should be understood. The
six classes of craving should be understood.

(enumeration)

4. (i) "'The six internal bases should be understood.' So it was
said. And with reference to what was this said? There are the
eye-base, the ear-base, the nose-base, the tongue-base, the body-
base, and the mind-base. So it was with reference to this that it
was said: 'The six internal bases should be understood.' This is
the first set of six. [281]

5. (ii) "'The six external bases should be understood.' So it was
said. And with reference to what was this said? There are the
form-base, the sound-base, the odour-base, the flavour-base, the


1129



1130 Chachakka Sutta: Sutta 148


tangible-base, and the mind-object-base. So it was with reference
to this that it was said: 'The six external bases should be under-
stood.' This is the second set of six.

6. (iii) "'The six classes of consciousness should be under-
stood.' So it was said. And with reference to what was this said?
Dependent on the eye and forms, eye-consciousness arises;
dependent on the ear and sounds, ear-consciousness arises;
dependent on the nose and odours, nose-consciousness arises;
dependent on the tongue and flavours, tongue-consciousness
arises; dependent on the body and tangibles, body-conscious-
ness arises; dependent on the mind and mind-objects, mind-
consciousness arises. So it was with reference to this that it was
said: 'The six classes of consciousness should be understood.'
This is the third set of six.

7. (iv) "'The six classes of contact should be understood.' So it
was said. And with reference to what was this said? Dependent
on the eye and forms, eye-consciousness arises; the meeting of
the three is contact. Dependent on the ear and sounds, ear-
consciousness arises; the meeting of the three is contact. Depen-
dent on the nose and odours, nose-consciousness arises; the
meeting of the three is contact. Dependent on the tongue and
flavours, tongue-consciousness arises; the meeting of the three is
contact. Dependent on the body and tangibles, body-conscious-
ness arises; the meeting of the three is contact. Dependent on
the mind and mind-objects, mind-consciousness arises; the
meeting of the three is contact. So it was with reference to this
that it was said: 'The six classes of contact should be under-
stood.' This is the fourth set of six.

8. (v) "'The six classes of feeling should be understood.' So it
was said. And with reference to what was this said? Dependent
on the eye and forms, eye-consciousness arises; the meeting of
the three is contact; with contact as condition there is feeling.
Dependent on the ear and sounds, ear-consciousness arises; the
meeting of the three is contact; with contact as condition there
is feeling. Dependent on the nose and odours, nose-conscious-
ness arises; the meeting of the three is contact; with contact as
condition there is feeling. Dependent on the tongue and
flavours, tongue-consciousness arises; the meeting of the three
is contact; with contact as condition there is feeling. Dependent
on the body and tangibles, body-consciousness arises; the meet-



iii 281


iii 282


The Six Sets of Six 1131


ing of the three is contact; with contact as condition there is
feeling. Dependent on the mind and mind-objects, mind-con-
sciousness arises; the meeting of the three is contact; with con-
tact as condition there is feeling. So it was with reference to this
that it was said: 'The six classes of feeling should be under-
stood.' [282] This is the fifth set of six.

9. (vi) "'The six classes of craving should be understood.' So it
was said. And with reference to what was this said? Dependent on
the eye and forms, eye-consciousness arises; the meeting of the
three is contact; with contact as condition there is feeling; with
feeling as condition there is craving. 1329 Dependent on the ear and
sounds, ear-consciousness arises... with feeling as condition there
is craving. Dependent on the nose and odours, nose-consciousness
arises... with feeling as condition there is craving. Dependent on
the tongue and flavours, tongue-consciousness arises. . .with feel-
ing as condition there is craving. Dependent on the body and tan-
gibles, body-consciousness arises... with feeling as condition there
is craving. Dependent on the mind and mind-objects, mind-con-
sciousness arises; the meeting of the three is contact; with contact
as condition there is feeling; with feeling as condition there is crav-
ing. So it was with reference to this that it was said: 'The six classes
of craving should be understood.' This is the sixth set of six.

(demonstration of not self)

10. (i) "If anyone says, 'The eye is self,' that is not tenable. 1330
The rise and fall of the eye are discerned, and since its rise and
fall are discerned, it would follow: 'My self rises and falls.' That
is why it is not tenable for anyone to say, 'The eye is self.' Thus
the eye is not self. 1331

"If anyone says, 'Forms are self' 1332 ... That is why it is not ten-
able for anyone to say, 'Forms are self.' Thus the eye is not self,
forms are not self.

"If anyone says, 'Eye-consciousness is self '...That is why it is
not tenable for anyone to say, 'Eye-consciousness is self.' Thus the
eye is not self, forms are not self, eye-consciousness is not self.

"If anyone says, 'Eye-contact is self '...That is why it is not ten-
able for anyone to say, 'Eye-contact is self.' Thus the eye is not
self, forms are not self, eye-consciousness is not self, eye-contact
is not self.


1132 Chachakka Sutta: Sutta 148


iii 283


"If anyone says, 'Feeling is self' [283]... That is why it is not
tenable for anyone to say, 'Feeling is self.' Thus the eye is not
self, forms are not self, eye-consciousness is not self, eye-contact
is not self, feeling is not self.

"If anyone says, 'Craving is self'... That is why it is not tenable
for anyone to say, 'Craving is self.' Thus the eye is not self,
forms are not self, eye-consciousness is not self, eye-contact is
not self, feeling is not self, craving is not self.

11. (ii) "If anyone says, 'The ear is self,' that is not tenable. The
rise and fall of the ear are discerned, and since its rise and fall
are discerned, it would follow: 'My self rises and falls.' That is
why it is not tenable for anyone to say, 'The ear is self.' Thus the
ear is not self.

"If anyone says, 'Sounds are self, '...'Ear-consciousness is
self, '...'Ear-contact is self,'. ..'Feeling is self, '...'Craving is
self '...That is why it is not tenable for anyone to say, 'Craving is
self.' Thus the ear is not self, sounds are not self, ear-conscious-
ness is not self, ear-contact is not self, feeling is not self, craving
is not self.

12. (iii) "If anyone says, 'The nose is self,' that is not tenable.
The rise and fall of the nose are discerned, and since its rise and
fall are discerned, it would follow: 'My self rises and falls.' That
is why it is not tenable for anyone to say, 'The nose is self.' Thus
the nose is not self.

"If anyone says, 'Odours are self,'. . .'Nose-consciousness is self/
...'Nose-contact is self/... 'Feeling is self/... 'Craving is self'. ..That
is why it is not tenable for anyone to say, 'Craving is self.' Thus
the nose is not self, odours are not self, nose-consciousness is not
self, nose-contact is not self, feeling is not self, craving is not self.

13. (iv) "If anyone says, 'The tongue is self/ that is not tenable.
The rise and fall of the tongue are discerned, and since its rise
and fall are discerned, it would follow: 'My self rises and falls.'
That is why it is not tenable for anyone to say, 'The tongue is
self.' Thus the tongue is not self.

"If anyone says, 'Flavours are self /...'Tongue-consciousness is
self /...'Tongue-contact is self/... 'Feeling is self/... 'Craving is
self'. . .That is why it is not tenable for anyone to say, 'Craving is
self.' Thus the tongue is not self, flavours are not self, tongue-
consciousness is not self, tongue-contact is not self, feeling is not
self, craving is not self.


iii 284


The Six Sets of Six 1133


14. (v) "If anyone says, 'The body is self/ that is not tenable.
The rise and fall of the body are discerned, and since its rise and
fall are discerned, it would follow: 'My self rises and falls.' That
is why it is not tenable for anyone to say, "The body is self.' Thus
the body is not self.

"If anyone says, 'Tangibles are self /...'Body-consciousness is
self/. ..'Body-contact is self,'... 'Feeling is self,'... 'Craving is
self' . . .That is why it is not tenable for anyone to say, 'Craving
is self.' Thus the body is not self, tangibles are not self, body-
consciousness is not self, body-contact is not self, feeling is not
self, craving is not self.

15. (vi) "If anyone says, 'The mind is self/ that is not tenable.
The rise and fall of the mind are discerned, and since its rise and
fall are discerned, it would follow: 'My self rises and falls.' That
is why it is not tenable for anyone to say, 'The mind is self.'
Thus the mind is not self.

"If anyone says, 'Mind-objects are self/.. .'Mind-consciousness
is self/... 'Mind-contact is self /...'Feeling is self/. ..[284]..,
'Craving is self '...That is why it is not tenable for anyone to say,
'Craving is self.' Thus the mind is not self, mind-objects are not
self, mind-consciousness is not self, mind-contact is not self,
feeling is not self, craving is not self.

(the origination of personality)

16. "Now, bhikkhus, this is the way leading to the origination of
personality. 1333 (i) One regards the eye thus: ‘This is mine, this I
am, this is my self.' One regards forms thus... One regards eye-
consciousness thus. ..One regards eye-contact thus. ..One
regards feeling thus... One regards craving thus: 'This is mine,
this I am, this is my self.'

17-21. (ii-vi) "One regards the ear thus: "This is mine, this I
am, this is my self. '...One regards the nose thus: "This is mine,
this I am, this is my self.'... One regards the tongue thus: "This is
mine, this I am, this is my self. '...One regards the body thus:
'This is mine, this I am, this is my self.'... One regards the mind
thus: "This is mine, this I am, this is my self.' One regards mind-
objects thus. ..One regards mind-consciousness thus.. .One
regards mind-contact thus... One regards feeling thus... One
regards craving thus: 'This is mine, this I am, this is my self.'


1134 Chachakka Sutta: Sutta 148


(the cessation of personality)

22. "Now, bhikkhus, this is the way leading to the cessation of
personality. 1334 (i) One regards the eye thus: 'This is not mine,
this I am not, this is not my self.' One regards forms thus... One
regards eye-consciousness thus. ..One regards eye-contact
thus... One regards feeling thus... One regards craving thus:
'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self/

23-27. (ii-vi) "One regards the ear thus: 'This is not mine, this
I am not, this is not my self.'... One regards the nose thus: 'This
is not mine, this I am not, this is not my self .'...One regards the
tongue thus: 'This is not mine, this I am not, this is not my
self.'... One regards the body thus: 'This is not mine, this I am
not, this is not my self.'. . .One regards the mind thus: 'This is not
mine, this I am not, this is not my self.' One regards mind-
objects thus... One regards mind-consciousness thus... One
regards mind-contact thus. ..One regards feeling [285]
thus... One regards craving thus: 'This is not mine, this I am not,
this is not my self.'


(the underlying tendencies)

28. (i) "Bhikkhus, dependent on the eye and forms, 1335 eye-con-
sciousness arises; the meeting of the three is contact; with con-
tact as condition there arises [a feeling] felt as pleasant or
painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant. When one is touched by
a pleasant feeling, if one delights in it, welcomes it, and remains
holding to it, then the underlying tendency to lust lies within
one. When one is touched by a painful feeling, if one sorrows,
grieves and laments, weeps beating one's breast and becomes
distraught, then the underlying tendency to aversion lies within
one. When one is touched by a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feel-
ing, if one does not understand as it actually is the origination,
the disappearance, the gratification, the danger, and the escape
in regard to that feeling, then the underlying tendency to igno-
rance lies within one. Bhikkhus, that one shall here and now
make an end of suffering without abandoning the underlying
tendency to lust for pleasant feeling, without abolishing the
underlying tendency to aversion towards painful feeling, with-
out extirpating the underlying tendency to ignorance in regard


iii 286


The Six Sets of Six 1135


to neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, without abandoning
ignorance and arousing true knowledge 1336 - this is impossible.

29-33. (ii-vi) "Bhikkhus, dependent on the ear and sounds,
ear-consciousness arises... Dependent on the mind and mind-
objects, mind-consciousness arises; the meeting of the three is
contact; with contact as condition there arises [a feeling] felt as
pleasant or painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant... Bhikkhus,
that one should here and now make an end of suffering without
abandoning the underlying tendency to lust for pleasant feel-
ing... without abandoning ignorance and arousing true knowl-
edge - this is impossible. [286]

(the abandonment of the underlying tendencies)

34. (i) "Bhikkhus, dependent on the eye and forms, eye-
consciousness arises; the meeting of the three is contact; with
contact as condition there arises [a feeling] felt as pleasant or
painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant. When one is touched by
a pleasant feeling, if one does not delight in it, welcome it, and
remain holding to it, then the underlying tendency to lust does
not lie within one. When one is touched by a painful feeling, if
one does not sorrow, grieve and lament, does not weep beating
one's breast and become distraught, then the underlying ten-
dency to aversion does not lie within one. When one is touched
by a neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling, if one understands as
it actually is the origination, the disappearance, the gratification,
the danger, and the escape in regard to that feeling, then the
underlying tendency to ignorance does not lie within one.
Bhikkhus, that one shall here and now make an end of suffering
by abandoning the underlying tendency to lust for pleasant
feeling, by abolishing the underlying tendency to aversioii
towards painful feeling, by extirpating the underlying tendency
to ignorance in regard to neither-painful-nor-pleasant feeling,
by abandoning ignorance and arousing true knowledge - this is
possible.

35-39. (ii-vi) "Bhikkhus, dependent on the ear and sounds, ear-
consciousness arises... Dependent on the mind and mind-objects,
mind-consciousness arises; the meeting of the three is contact;
with contact as condition there arises [a feeling] felt as pleasant or
painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant... Bhikkhus, that one shall


1136 Chachakka Sutta: Sutta 148


iii 287



here and now make an end of suffering by abandoning the
underlying tendency to lust for pleasant feeling... by abandon-
ing ignorance and arousing true knowledge - this is possible.

(liberation)

40. "Seeing thus, bhikkhus, a well-taught noble disciple becomes
disenchanted with the eye, disenchanted with forms, disen-
chanted with eye-consciousness, disenchanted with eye-contact,
disenchanted with feeling, disenchanted with craving.

"He becomes disenchanted with the ear... He becomes disen-
chanted with the nose... He becomes disenchanted with the
tongue. ..He becomes disenchanted with the body. ..He
becomes disenchanted with the mind, disenchanted with mind-
objects, disenchanted with mind-consciousness, disenchanted
with mind-contact, disenchanted with feeling, disenchanted
with craving.

41. "Being disenchanted, [287] he becomes dispassionate.
Through dispassion [his mind] is liberated. When it is liberat-
ed, there comes the knowledge: 'It is liberated.' He under-
stands: 'Birth is destroyed, the holy life has been lived, what
had to be done has been done, there is no more coming to any
state of being.'"

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words. Now while this dis-
course was being spoken, through not clinging the minds of
sixty bhikkhus were liberated from the taints. 1337


149 Mahasalayatanika Sutta
The Great Sixfold Base


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was liv-
ing at SavatthI in Jeta's Grove, Anathapindika's Park. There he
addressed the bhikkhus thus: "Bhikkhus." - "Venerable sir,"
they replied. The Blessed One said this:

2. "Bhikkhus, I shall teach you a discourse on the great sixfold
base. Listen and attend closely to what I shall say." - "Yes, vener-
able sir," the bhikkhus replied. The Blessed One said this:

3. "Bhikkhus, when one does not know and see the eye as it
actually is, 1338 when one does not know and see forms as they
actually are, when one does not know and see eye-consciousness
as it actually is, when one does not know and see eye-contact as
it actually is, when one does not know and see as it actually is
[the feeling] felt as pleasant or painful or neither-painful-nor-
pleasant that arises with eye-contact as condition, then one is
inflamed by lust for the eye, for forms, for eye-consciousness, for
eye-contact, for [the feeling] felt as pleasant or painful or neither-
painful-nor-pleasant that arises with eye-contact as condition.

"When one abides inflamed by lust, fettered, infatuated, con-
templating gratification, then the five aggregates affected by
clinging are built up for oneself in the future; 1339 and one's crav-
ing - which brings renewal of being, is accompanied by delight
and lust, and delights in this and that - increases. One's bodily
and [288] mental troubles increase, one's bodily and mental tor-
ments increase, one's bodily and mental fevers increase, and one
experiences bodily and mental suffering.

4-8. "When one does not know and see the ear as it actually
is. . . When one does not know and see the nose as it actually is. . .
When one does not know and see the tongue as it actually is...
When one does not know and see the body as it actually is...


1137


iii 289


j:

1138 Mahasalayatanika Sutta: Sutta 149


When one does not know and see the mind as it actually is... one
experiences bodily and mental suffering.

9. "Bhikkhus, when one knows and sees the eye as it actually
is, 1340 when one knows and sees forms as they actually are, when
one knows and sees eye-consciousness as it actually is, when one
knows and sees eye-contact as it actually is, when one knows
and sees as it actually is [the feeling] felt as pleasant or painful or
neither-painful-nor-pleasant that arises with eye-contact as con-
dition, then one is not inflamed by lust for the eye, for forms, for
eye-consciousness, for eye-contact, for [the feeling] felt as pleas-
ant or painful or neither-painful-nor-pleasant that arises with
eye-contact as condition.

"When one abides uninflamed by lust, unfettered, uninfatuat-
ed, contemplating danger, then the five aggregates affected by
clinging are diminished for oneself in the future; and one's
craving - which brings renewal of being, is accompanied by
delight and lust, and delights in this or that - is abandoned.
One's bodily and mental troubles are abandoned, one's bodily
and mental torments are abandoned, one's bodily and mental
fevers are abandoned, [289] and one experiences bodily and
mental pleasure.

10. "The view of a person such as this is right view. His inten-
tion is right intention, his effort is right effort, his mindfulness is
right mindfulness, his concentration is right concentration. But
his bodily action, his verbal action, and his livelihood have
already been well purified earlier. 1341 Thus this Noble Eightfold
Path comes to fulfilment in him by development. When he
develops this Noble Eightfold Path, the four foundations of
mindfulness also come to fulfilment in him by development; the
four right kinds of striving also come to fulfilment in him by
development; the four bases for spiritual power also come to
fulfilment in him by development; the five faculties also come to
fulfilment in him by development; the five powers also come to
fulfilment in him by development; the seven enlightenment fac-
tors also come to fulfilment in him by development. These two
things - serenity and insight - occur in him yoked evenly
together. 1342 He fully understands by direct knowledge those
things that should be fully understood by direct knowledge. He
abandons by direct knowledge those things that should be aban-
doned by direct knowledge. He develops by direct knowledge


iii 290


The Great Sixfold Base 1139


those things that should be developed by direct knowledge. He
realises by direct knowledge those things that should be realised
by direct knowledge. 1343

11. "And what things should be fully understood by direct
knowledge? The answer to that is: the five aggregates affected
by clinging, that is, the material form aggregate affected by
clinging, the feeling aggregate affected by clinging, the percep-
tion aggregate affected by clinging, the formations aggregate
affected by clinging, the consciousness aggregate affected by
clinging. These are the things that should be fully understood by
direct knowledge.

"And what things should be abandoned by direct knowledge?
Ignorance and craving for being. These are the things that
should be abandoned by direct knowledge.

"And what things should be developed by direct knowledge?
Serenity and insight. 1344 These are the things that should be
developed by direct knowledge. [290]

"And what things should be realised by direct knowledge?
True knowledge and deliverance. 1345 These are the things that
should be realised by direct knowledge.

12-14. "When one knows and sees the ear as it actually
is... These are the things that should be realised by direct
knowledge. 1346

15-17. "When one knows and sees the nose as it actually
is... These are the things that should be realised by direct
knowledge.

18-20. "When one knows and sees the tongue as it actually
is. ..These are the things that should be realised by direct
knowledge.

21-23. "When one knows and sees the body as it actually
is... These are the things that should be realised by direct
knowledge.

24-26. "When one knows and sees the mind as it actually
is... These are the things that should be realised by direct
knowledge."

That is what the Blessed One said. The bhikkhus were satisfied
and delighted in the Blessed One's words.



150 Nagaravindeyya Sutta
To the Nagaravindans


1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One was
wandering in the Kosalan country with a large Sangha of
bhikkhus, and eventually arrived at a Kosalan village named
Nagaravinda.

2. The brahmin householders of Nagaravinda heard: "The
recluse Gotama, the son of the Sakyans who went forth from a
Sakyan clan, has been wandering in the Kosalan country with a
large Sangha of bhikkhus [291] and has come to Nagaravinda.
Now a good report of Master Gotama has been spread to this
effect: 'That Blessed One is accomplished, fully enlightened... (as
Sutta 41, §2 )... he reveals a holy life that is utterly perfect and
pure/ Now it is good to see such arahants."

3. Then the brahmin householders of Nagaravinda went to the
Blessed One. Some paid homage to the Blessed One and sat
down at one side; some exchanged greetings with him, and
when this courteous and amiable talk was finished, sat down at
one side; some extended their hands in reverential salutation
towards the Blessed One and sat down at one side; some pro-
nounced their name and clan in the Blessed One's presence and
sat down at one side; some kept silent and sat down at one side.
When they were seated, the Blessed One said to them:

4. "Householders, if wanderers of other sects ask you thus:
'Householders, what kind of recluses and brahmins should not
be honoured, respected, revered, and venerated?' you should
answer them thus: 'Those recluses and brahmins who are not
rid of lust, hate, and delusion regarding forms cognizable by the
eye, whose minds are not inwardly peaceful, and who conduct
themselves now righteously, now unrighteously in body,
speech, and mind - such recluses and brahmins should not be
honoured, respected, revered, and venerated. Why is that?


1140


iii 292


To the Nagaravindans 1141


Because we ourselves are not rid of lust, hate, and delusion
regarding forms cognizable by the eye, our minds are not
inwardly peaceful, and we conduct ourselves now righteously,
now unrighteously in body, speech, and mind. Since we do not
see any higher righteous conduct on the part of those good
recluses and brahmins, they should not be honoured, respected,
revered, and venerated.

"'Those recluses and brahmins who are not rid of lust, hate, and
delusion regarding sounds cognizable by the ear... regarding
odours cognizable by the nose... regarding flavours cognizable by
the tongue. ..regarding tangibles cognizable by the
body... regarding mind-objects cognizable by the mind, whose
minds are not inwardly peaceful, and who conduct themselves
now righteously, now unrighteously in body, speech, and
mind... should not be honoured... [292]... Since we do not see
any higher righteous conduct on the part of those good recluses
and brahmins, they should not be honoured, respected, revered,
and venerated.' Being thus asked, householders, you should
answer those wanderers of other sects in this way.

5. "But, householders, if wanderers of other sects ask you
thus: 'Householders, what kind of recluses and brahmins should
be honoured, respected, revered, and venerated?' you should
answer them thus: 'Those recluses and brahmins who are rid of
lust, hate, and delusion regarding forms cognizable by the eye,
whose minds are inwardly peaceful, and who conduct them-
selves righteously in body, speech, and mind - such recluses
and brahmins should be honoured, respected, revered, and ven-
erated. Why is that? Because we ourselves are not rid of lust,
hate, and delusion regarding forms cognizable by the eye, our
minds are not inwardly peaceful, and we conduct ourselves
now righteously, now unrighteously, in body, speech, and
mind. Since we see higher righteous conduct on the part of those
good recluses and brahmins, they should be honoured, respected,
revered, and venerated.

"'Those recluses and brahmins who are rid of lust, hate, and
delusion regarding sounds cognizable by the ear... regarding
odours cognizable by the nose... regarding flavours cognizable
by the tongue. ..regarding tangibles cognizable by the
body... regarding mind-objects cognizable by the mind, whose
minds are inwardly peaceful, and who conduct themselves



iii 293


1142 Nagaravindeyya Sutta: Sutta 150


righteously in body, speech, and mind... should be honoured...
Since we see higher righteous conduct on the part of those good
recluses and brahmins, they should be honoured, respected,
revered, and venerated.' Being thus asked, householders, you
should answer those wanderers of other sects in this way.

6. "Householders, if wanderers of other sects ask you thus:
'But what are your reasons and what is your evidence regarding
those venerable ones whereby you say about them: "Surely
these venerable ones [293] are either rid of lust or are practising
for the removal of lust; they are either rid of hate or are practis-
ing for the removal of hate; they are either rid of delusion or are
practising for the removal of delusion"?' - being asked thus, you
should answer those wanderers of other sects thus: 'It is because
those venerable ones resort to remote jungle-thicket resting
places in the forest. For there are no forms cognizable by the eye
there of a kind that they could look at and delight in. There are
no sounds cognizable by the ear there of a kind that they could
listen to and delight in. There are no odours cognizable by the
nose there of a kind that they could smell and delight in. There
are no flavours cognizable by the tongue there of a kind that
they could taste and delight in. There are no tangibles cogniz-
able by the body there of a kind that they could touch and
delight in. These are our reasons, friends, this is our evidence
whereby we say about those venerable ones: "Surely these ven-
erable ones are either, rid of lust, hate, and delusion, or are prac-
tising for their removal."' Being thus asked, householders, you
should answer those wanderers of other sects in this way."

7. When this was said, the brahmin householders of
Nagaravinda said to the Blessed One: "Magnificent, Master
Gotama! Magnificent, Master Gotama! Master Gotama has made
the Dhamma clear in many ways, as though he were turning
upright what had been overthrown, revealing what was hidden,
showing the way to one who was lost, or holding up a lamp in
the darkness for those with eyesight to see forms. We go to
Master Gotama for refuge and to the Dhamma and to the
Sangha of bhikkhus. From today let Master Gotama accept us as
lay followers who have gone to him for refuge for life."


151 Pindapataparisuddhi Sutta
The Purification of Almsfood


1. Thus HAVE I HEARD. On one occasion the Blessed One was
living at Rajagaha in the Bamboo Grove, the Squirrels' Sanc-
tuary. Then, when it was evening, the venerable Sariputta rose
from meditation and went to the Blessed One. After paying
homage to him, he sat down at one side. The Blessed One then
said to him: [294]

2. "Sariputta, your faculties are clear. The colour of your skin
is pure and bright. What abiding do you often abide in now,
Sariputta?"

"Now, venerable sir, I often abide in voidness." 1347

"Good, good, Sariputta! Now, indeed, you often abide in the
abiding of a great man. For this is the abiding of a great man,
namely, voidness. 1348

3. "So, Sariputta, if a bhikkhu should wish: 'May I now often
abide in voidness/ he should consider thus: 'On the path by
which 1 went to the village for alms, or in the place where I
wandered for alms, or on the path by which I returned from
the almsround, was there any desire, lust, hate, delusion, or
aversion in my mind regarding forms cognizable by the
eye?' 1349 If, by so reviewing, he knows thus: 'On the path by
which I went to the village for alms, or in the place where I
wandered for alms, or on the path by which I returned from
the almsround, there was desire, lust, hate, delusion, or aver-
sion in my mind regarding forms cognizable by the eye,' then
he should make an effort to abandon those evil unwholesome
states. But if, by reviewing, he knows thus: 'On the path by
which I went to the village for alms, and in the place where I
wandered for alms, and on the path by which I returned from
the almsround, there was no desire, lust, hate, delusion, or
aversion in my mind regarding forms cognizable by the eye,'


1143


iii 295


1144 PindapatapSrisuddhi Sutta: Sutta 151


then he can abide happy and glad, training day and night in
wholesome states.

4-8. "Again, Sariputta, a bhikkhu should consider thus: 'On
the path by which I went to the village for alms, or in the place
where I wandered for alms, or on the path by which I returned
from the almsround, was there any desire, lust, hate, delusion,
or aversion in my mind regarding sounds cognizable by the
ear?... regarding odours cognizable by the nose?... regarding
flavours cognizable by the tongue?. . .regarding tangibles cogniz-
able by the body?. ..regarding mind-objects cognizable by the
mind?' [295] If, by reviewing, he knows thus: 'On the path by
which I went to the village for alms... there was desire, lust,
hate, delusion, or aversion in my mind regarding mind-objects
cognizable by the mind/ then he should make an effort to aban-
don those evil unwholesome states. But if, by reviewing, he
knows thus: 'On the path by which I went to the village for
alms... there was no desire, lust, hate, delusion, or aversion in
my mind regarding mind-objects cognizable by the mind/ then
he can abide happy and glad, training day and night in whole-
some states.

9. "Again, Sariputta, a bhikkhu should consider thus: 'Are the
five cords of sensual pleasure abandoned in me?' 1350 If, by
reviewing, he knows thus: 'The five cords of sensual pleasure
are not abandoned in me/ then he should make an effort to
abandon those five cords of sensual pleasure. But if, by review-
ing, he knows thus: 'The five cords of sensual pleasure are aban-
doned in me/ then he can abide happy and glad, training day
and night in wholesome states.

10. "Again, Sariputta, a bhikkhu should consider thus: 'Are
the five hindrances abandoned in me?' If, by reviewing, he
knows thus: 'The five hindrances are not abandoned in me/
then he should make an effort to abandon those five hindrances.
But if, by reviewing, he knows thus: 'The five hindrances are
abandoned in me,' then he can abide happy and glad, training
day and night in wholesome states.

11. "Again, Sariputta, a bhikkhu should consider thus: 'Are
the five aggregates affected by clinging fully understood by
me?' If, by reviewing, he knows thus: 'The five aggregates
affected by clinging are not fully understood by me,' then he


iii 297


The Purification of Almsfood 1145


should make an effort to fully understand those five aggregates
affected by clinging. But if, by reviewing, [296] he knows thus:
'The five aggregates affected by clinging are fully understood by
me/ then he can abide happy and glad, training day and night
in wholesome states.

12. "Again, Sariputta, a bhikkhu should consider thus: 'Are
the four foundations of mindfulness developed in me?' If, by
reviewing, he knows thus: 'The four foundations of mindfulness
are not developed in me,' then he should make an effort to
develop those four foundations of mindfulness. But if, by
reviewing, he knows thus: 'The four foundations of mindfulness
are developed in me/ then he can abide happy and glad, train-
ing day and night in wholesome states.

13-19. "Again, Sariputta, a bhikkhu should consider thus: 'Are
the four right kinds of striving developed in me?... Are the four
bases for spiritual power developed in me?... Are the five facul-
ties developed in me?. ..Are the five powers developed in
me?... Are the seven enlightenment factors developed in
me?. ..Is the Noble Eightfold Path developed in me? [297], ..Are
serenity and insight developed in me?' If, by reviewing, he
knows thus: 'Serenity and insight are not developed in me/ then
he should make an effort to develop them. But if, by reviewing,
he knows thus: 'Serenity and insight are developed in me/ then
he can abide happy and glad, training day and night in whole-
some states.

20. "Again, Sariputta, a bhikkhu should consider thus: 'Are
true knowledge and deliverance realised by me?' If, by review-
ing, he knows thus: 'True knowledge and deliverance are not
realised by me/ then he should make an effort to realise true
knowledge and deliverance. But if, by reviewing, he knows
thus: 'True knowledge and deliverance are realised by me/ then
he can abide happy and glad, training day and night in whole-
some states. 1351

21. "Sariputta, whatever recluses and brahmins in the past
have purified their almsfood have all done so by repeatedly
reviewing thus. Whatever recluses and brahmins in the future
will purify their almsfood will all do so by repeatedly reviewing
thus. Whatever recluses and brahmins in the present are purify-
ing their almsfood are all doing so by repeatedly reviewing



iii 297


1146 Pindapataparisuddhi Sutta: Sutta 151


thus. Therefore, Sariputta, you should train thus: 'We will purify
our almsfood by repeatedly reviewing thus.'"

That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Sariputta was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.


152 Indriyabhavana Sutta
The Development of the Faculties


[298] 1. Thus have I heard. On one occasion the Blessed One
was living at Kajangala in a grove of mukhelu trees.

2. Then the brahmin student Uttara, a pupil of the brahmin
Parasariya, went to the Blessed One and exchanged greetings
with him. When this courteous and amiable talk was finished,
he sat down at one side. The Blessed One then asked him:
"Uttara, does the brahmin Parasariya teach his disciples the
development of the faculties?"

"He does, Master Gotama."

"But, Uttara, how does he teach his disciples the development
of the faculties?"

"Here, Master Gotama, one does not see forms with the eye,
one does not hear sounds with the ear. That is how the brahmin
Parasariya teaches his disciples the development of the faculties."

"If that is so, Uttara, then a blind man and a deaf man will
have developed faculties, according to what the brahmin
Parasariya says. For a blind man does not see forms with the
eye, and a deaf man does not hear sounds with the ear."

When this was said, the brahmin student Uttara, Parasariya's
pupil, sat silent, dismayed, with shoulders drooping and head
down, glum, and without response.

3. Then, knowing this, the Blessed One addressed the venera-
ble Ananda: "Ananda, the brahmin Parasariya teaches his disci-
ples the development of the faculties in one way, but in the
Noble One's Discipline the supreme development of the faculties
is otherwise." 1352

"Now is the time. Blessed One, now is the time. Sublime One,
for the Blessed One [299] to teach the supreme development of
the faculties in the Noble One's Discipline. Having heard it from
the Blessed One, the bhikkhus will remember it."


1147


iii 300



1148 InAriyabhavana Sutta: Sutta 152

"Then listen, Ananda, and attend closely to what I shall say."

"Yes, venerable sir," he replied. The Blessed One said this:

4. "Now, Ananda, how is there the supreme development of
the faculties in the Noble One's Discipline? Here, Ananda, when
a bhikkhu sees a form with the eye, there arises in him what is
agreeable, there arises what is disagreeable, there arises what is
both agreeable and disagreeable. 1353 He understands thus:
'There has arisen in me what is agreeable, there has arisen what
is disagreeable, there has arisen what is both agreeable and dis-
agreeable. But that is conditioned, gross, dependently arisen;
this is peaceful, this is sublime, that is, equanimity.' The agree-
able that arose, the disagreeable that arose, and the both agree-
able and disagreeable that arose cease in him and equanimity is
established. 1354 Just as a man with good sight, having opened his
eyes might shut them or having shut his eyes might open them,
so too concerning anything at all, the agreeable that arose, the
disagreeable that arose, and the both agreeable and disagreeable
that arose cease just as quickly, just as rapidly, just as easily, and
equanimity is established. This is called in the Noble One's
Discipline the supreme development of the faculties regarding
forms cognizable by the eye. 1355

5. "Again, Ananda, when a bhikkhu hears a sound with the
ear, there arises in him what is agreeable, there arises what is
disagreeable, there arises what is both agreeable and disagree-
able. He understands thus:... and equanimity is established. Just
as a strong man might easily snap his fingers, so too concerning
anything at all, the agreeable that arose, the disagreeable that
arose, and the both agreeable and disagreeable that arose cease
just as quickly, just as rapidly, just as easily, and equanimity is
established. This is called in the Noble One's Discipline the
supreme development of the faculties regarding sounds cogniz-
able by the ear.

6. "Again, Ananda, when a bhikkhu smells an odour with the
nose, there arises in him what is agreeable, there arises what is
disagreeable, there arises what is both agreeable and disagree-
able. He understands thus:... and equanimity is established. Just
as [300] raindrops on a slightly sloping lotus leaf roll off and do
not remain there, so too concerning anything at all, the agree-
able that arose, the disagreeable that arose, and the both agree-
able and disagreeable that arose cease just as quickly, just as


iii 300


The Development of the Faculties 1149


rapidly, just as easily, and equanimity is established. This is
called in the Noble One's Discipline the supreme development
of the faculties regarding odours cognizable by the nose.

7. "Again, Ananda, when a bhikkhu tastes a flavour with the
tongue, there arises in him what is agreeable, there arises what
is disagreeable, there arises what is both agreeable and disagree-
able. He understands thus:... and equanimity is established. Just
as a strong man might easily spit out a ball of spittle collected on
the tip of his tongue, so too concerning anything at all, the
agreeable that arose, the disagreeable that arose, and the both
agreeable and disagreeable that arose cease just as quickly, just
as rapidly, just as easily, and equanimity is established. This is
Called in the Noble One's Discipline the supreme development
of the faculties regarding flavours cognizable by the tongue.

8. "Again, Ananda, when a bhikkhu touches a tangible with
the body, there arises in him what is agreeable, there arises what
is disagreeable, there arises what is both agreeable and disagree-
able. He understands thus:... and equanimity is established. Just
as a strong man might extend his flexed arm or flex his extended
arm, so too concerning anything at all, the agreeable that arose,
the disagreeable that arose, and the both agreeable and dis-
agreeable that arose cease just as quickly, just as rapidly, just as
easily, and equanimity is established. This is called in the Noble
One's Discipline the supreme development of the faculties
regarding tangibles cognizable by the body.

9. "Again, Ananda, when a bhikkhu cognizes a mind-object
with the mind, there arises in him what is agreeable, there arises
what is disagreeable, there arises what is both agreeable and dis-
agreeable. He understands thus:... and equanimity is estab-
lished. Just as if a man were to let two or three drops of water
fall onto an iron plate heated for a whole day, the falling of the
drops might be slow but they would quickly vaporise and van-
ish, 1356 so too concerning anything at all, the agreeable that
arose, the disagreeable that arose, and the both agreeable and
disagreeable that arose cease just as quickly, just as rapidly, just
as easily, and equanimity is established. This is called in the
Noble One's Discipline the supreme development of the facul-
ties regarding ideas cognizable by the mind.

"That is how there is the supreme development of the facul-
ties in the Noble One's Discipline.


iii 302


1150 Indriyabhavana Sutta: Sutta 152


10. "And how, Ananda, is one a disciple in higher training,
one who has entered upon the way? Here, Ananda, when a
bhikkhu sees a form with the eye... [301] hears a sound with the
ear... smells an odour with the nose... tastes a flavour with the
tongue... touches a tangible with the body... cognizes a mind-
object with the mind, there arises in him what is agreeable, there
arises what is disagreeable, there arises what is both agreeable
and disagreeable; he is ashamed, humiliated and disgusted by
the agreeable that arose, by the disagreeable that arose, and by
the both agreeable and disagreeable that arose. 1357 That is how
one is a disciple in higher training, one who has entered upon
the way.

11-16. "And how, Ananda, is one a noble one with developed
faculties? 1358 Here, Ananda, when a bhikkhu sees a form with
the eye... hears a sound with the ear... smells an odour with the
nose... tastes a flavour with the tongue... touches a tangible with
the body... cognizes a mind-object with the mind, there arises in
him what is agreeable, there arises what is disagreeable, there
arises what is both agreeable and disagreeable. 1359 If he should
wish: 'May I abide perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive/
he abides perceiving the unrepulsive in the repulsive. If he
[ should wish: 'May I abide perceiving the repulsive in the unre-

pulsive,' he abides perceiving the repulsive in the unrepulsive.
If he should wish: 'May I abide perceiving the unrepulsive in
the repulsive and the unrepulsive/ he abides perceiving the
unrepulsive in that. If he should wish: 'May I abide perceiving
the repulsive in the unrepulsive and the repulsive/ he abides
perceiving the repulsive in that. If he should wish: 'May I,
avoiding both the repulsive and unrepulsive, [302] abide in
equanimity, mindful and fully aware/ he abides in equanimity
towards that, mindful and fully aware. 1360 That is how one is a
noble one with developed faculties.

17. "So, Ananda, the supreme development of the faculties in
the Noble One's Discipline has been taught by me, the disciple
in higher training who has entered upon the way has been
taught by me, and the noble one with developed faculties has
been taught by me.

18. "What should be done for his disciples out of compassion
by a Teacher who seeks their welfare and has compassion for
them, that I have done for you, Ananda. There are these roots of



ni 302


The Development of the Faculties 1151


trees, these empty huts. Meditate, Ananda, do not delay, or else
you will regret it later. This is our instruction to you/ 7


That is what the Blessed One said. The venerable Ananda was
satisfied and delighted in the Blessed One's words.



Bibliography
List of Abbreviations
Notes

Pali-English Glossary
Indexes



Bibliography


A. PALI TEXTS

The Majjhima Nikaya. 3 vols. Vol. 1 edited by V. Trenckner; Vols.
2 and 3 edited by Robert Chalmers. First published 1888-99.
Reprint. London: Pali Text Society, 1977-79. Roman-script
edition.

The Majjhima Nikaya. 3 vols. Rangoon: Buddhasasana Samiti,
1954. Burmese-script edition published in connection with the
Sixth Buddhist Council held in Burma, 1954-56.

The Majjhima Nikaya. 3 vols. Sri Lanka: Lanka Buddha
Mandalaya, 1964-74. Sinhala-script edition published in the
Buddha Jayanti Tripitaka Series; Sinhala translation on facing
pages.

Majjhima Nikaya Atthakatha (Papahcasudani). 4 vols. Rangoon:
Buddhasasana Samiti, 1957. Burmese-script edition of Acariya
Buddhaghosa's commentary to the Majjhima Nikaya.

Majjhima Nikaya Tika. 3 vols. Rangoon: Buddhasasana Samiti,
1961. Burmese-script edition of Acariya Dhammapala's sub-
commentary to the Majjhima Nikaya.

B. TRANSLATIONS AND STUDIES

Basham, A.L. History and Doctrines of the Ajwikas. 1951. Reprint.
Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1981. Study of a philosophical
school to which several of the Buddha's contemporary rivals
belonged.

Bodhi, Bhikkhu, trans. The Discourse on the All-Embracing Net of
Views: The Brahmajala Sutta and Its Commentaries. BPS, 1978.
Translation of the first sutta in the Dlgha Nikaya, a parallel to
MN 102.


1155


1156 The Majjhima Nikaya


, trans. The Discourse on the Fruits of Recluseship: The

Samahhaphala Sutta and Its Commentaries. BPS, 1989.
Translation of the second sutta in the Digha Nikaya; clarifies
views of the six heterodox teachers often mentioned in the
Majjhima Nikaya.

, trans. The Discourse on the Root of Existence: The

Mulapariyaya Sutta and Its Commentaries. Translation of MN 1,
commentary, portions of subcommentary.

Homer, I.B., trans. The Book of the Discipline. 6 vols. London: PTS,
1949-66. Translation of the complete Vinaya Pitaka.

, trans. The Collection of the Middle Length Sayings. 3 vols.

London: PTS, 1954-59. Long-standing translation of the com-
plete Majjhima Nikaya.

. Early Buddhism and the Taking of Life. BPS Wheel No. 104,

1967.

Kloppenborg, Ria. The Paccekabuddha: A Buddhist Ascetic. BPS
Wheel No. 305/307, 1983. Study of the figure extolled in
MN 116.

Nanamoli, Bhikkhu, trans. The Greater Discourse on Voidness. BPS
Wheel No. 87, 1965. Translation of MN 122 and commentary.

. The Life of the Buddha According to the Pali Canon. BPS,

1972. Biography of the Buddha constructed from canonical
texts.

— , trans. Mindfulness of Breathing. 2nd ed. BPS, 1964.

Includes translation of MN 118 and related texts.

, trans. The Minor Readings and The Illustrator of Ultimate

Meaning. London: PTS, 1960. Appendix contains discussion of
translator's understanding of Pali technical terms.

, trans. The Path of Purification (Visuddhimagga), 4th ed.

BPS, 1980. Encyclopaedic work on Buddhist doctrine and
meditation, by Acariya Buddhaghosa. "Cornerstone" of the
commentaries.

, trans. A Treasury of the Buddha's Words. Bangkok:

Mahamakutarajavidyalaya, 1980. Ninety Majjhima suttas,
selected and edited by Bhikkhu Khantipalo.

Nanananda, Bhikkhu. Concept and Reality in Early Buddhism. BPS,
1971. Includes exposition of MN 18.

, trans. Ideal Solitude. BPS Wheel No. 188, 1973.

Translation of MN 131 with introduction and notes.


Bibliography 1157


Nyanaponika Thera, trans. The Discourse on the Snake Simile. BPS
Wheel No. 48/49, 1962. Translation of MN 22 with introduc-
tion and notes.

. The Five Mental Hindrances. BPS Wheel No. 26, 1961.

Includes translation of commentary on similes in MN 39.

. The Four Nutriments of Life. BPS Wheel No. 105/106,

1967. Explicates the nutriments mentioned in MN 9 and
MN 38.

, trans. The Greater Discourse on the Elephant-Footprint

Simile. BPS Wheel No. 101, 1966. Translation of MN 28 with
introduction and notes.

. The Heart of Buddhist Meditation. London: Rider and Co.,

1962; BPS, 1992. Includes translation of MN 10 with modern
commentary.

. The Roots of Good and Evil. BPS Wheel No. 251/253, 1978.

Canonical study of the unwholesome roots and their antidotes.

, trans. The Simile of the Cloth and The Discourse on

Effacement. BPS Wheel No. 61/62, 1964. Translation of MN 7
and MN 8 with introduction and notes.

— — — . The Threefold Refuge. BPS Wheel No. 76, 1965. Includes
commentary on refuge formula often met with in the
Majjhima Nikaya.

Piyadassi Thera. The Seven Factors of Enlightenment. BPS Wheel
No. 1, 1957.

Soma Thera, trans. The Removal of Distracting Thoughts. BPS
Wheel No. 21, 1960. Translation of MN 20 with commentary
and subcommentary.

, trans. The Way of Mindfulness, 5th ed. BPS, 1981.

Translation of MN 10 and its commentary and subcommentary.

Thittila, Sayadaw U, trans. The Book of Analysis (Vibhanga).
London: PTS, 1969. Includes explanation of Tathagata's pow-
ers (MN 12), elements and bases (MN 115).

Walshe, Maurice, trans. Thus Have I Heard: Long Discourses of the
Buddha. London: Wisdom Publications, 1987. Recent transla-
tion of the complete Dlgha Nikaya.

Watanabe, Fumimaro. Philosophy and its Development in the
Nikayas and Abhidhamma. Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, 1983.
Chapters on Abhidhamma elements in the Nikayas and on the
Codes ( matika ).



List of Abbreviations


AN Anguttara Nikaya

BBS Burmese-script Buddhasasana Samiti edition of the
Majjhima Nikaya

BPS Buddhist Publication Society of Kandy, Sri Lanka
Cv Culavagga (Vinaya Pitaka)

Dhp Dhammapada

DN Dlgha Nikaya

Jat Jataka

Kh Khandhaka (Vinaya Pitaka)

MA Majjhima Nikaya Atthakatha
Miln Milindapanha

MLS Middle Length Sayings (see Bibliography, Homer)

MN Majjhima Nikaya

Ms Ven. Nanamoli's manuscript translation of the Majjhima
Nikaya

MT Majjhima Nikaya Tika
Mv Mahavagga (Vinaya Pitaka)

Nm Bhikkhu Nanamoli

Pac Pacittiya

Par Parajika

PED Pali-English Dictionary (Pali Text Society)

PTS Pali Text Society

Pts Patisambhidamagga

Pug Puggalapannatti

SBJ Sinhala-script Buddha Jayanti Tripitaka Series edition of
the Majjhima Nikaya
SN Samyutta Nikaya

Sn Sutta Nipata

Thag Theragatha


1159


1160 The Majjhima Nikaya


Ud Udana
Vbh Vibhanga
Vin Vinaya Pitaka
Vsm Visuddhimagga

In the case of references containing two figures separated by a
slash, the figure to the right of the slash is the volume and page
number of the PTS edition of the Pali text. Of the figures to the
left of the slash, references to the Samyutta Nikaya and the
Udana indicate chapter and sutta number; those to the
Anguttara Nikaya indicate division and sutta number; those to
the Dlgha Nikaya indicate the sutta, section, and verse number
assigned in Maurice Walshe's translation. Thus Have I Heard (see
Bibliography). References to the Visuddhimagga are to chapter
and section number of Bhikkhu Nanamoli's translation. The Path
of Purification. All references to the Majjhima Nikaya are to the
sutta and section number of the present work.




Notes


SUTTA 1

1 For a fuller treatment of this important and difficult
sutta, see Bhikkhu Bodhi, Discourse on the Root of
Existence. This work contains, besides a translation of the
sutta, a lengthy analytical study of its philosophical sig-
nificance and copious extracts from the very helpful com-
mentarial literature that has accumulated around it.
Nm's rendering of this sutta in Ms was highly conjec-
tural; thus, while I have retained most of his terminolo-
gy, I have substituted my own rendering of the syntax to
bring out the meaning that accords with the traditional
interpretation and that seems warranted by the original
Pali text as well. The key passages as Nm rendered them
will be given in the Notes.

2 MA explains that the Buddha delivered this sutta to dis-
pel the conceit that had arisen in five hundred bhikkhus
on account of their erudition and intellectual mastery of
the Buddha's teachings. These bhikkhus were formerly
brahmins learned in the Vedic literature, and the
Buddha's cryptic utterances may well have been intend-
ed to challenge the brahmanic views to which they may
still have adhered.

3 Sabbadhammamulapariyaya. MT explains that the word
"all" (s abba) is being used here in the restricted sense of
the "all of personality" (s akkayasabba), that is, with refer-
ence to all states or phenomena ( dhamma ) comprised
within the five aggregates affected by clinging (see
MN 28.4). Supramundane states - the paths, fruits, and


1161


1162 The Majjhima Nikaya


5


Nibbana - are excluded. The "root of all things" - that is,
the special condition that maintains the continuity of the
process of repeated existence - MT explains to be crav-
ing, conceit, and views (which are the underlying springs
of "conceiving"), and these in turn are underlaid by igno-
rance, suggested in the sutta by the phrase "he has not
fully understood it."

The "untaught ordinary person" ( assutava puthujjana) is
the common worldling, who possesses neither learning
nor spiritual accomplishment in the Dhamma of the
noble ones, and allows himself to be dominated by the
multitude of defilements and wrong views. See Bodhi,
Discourse on the Root of Existence, pp. 40-46.

Pathavim pathavito sahjanati. Although perceiving "earth
as earth" seems to suggest seeing the object as it really is,
the aim of Buddhist insight meditation, the context
makes it clear that the ordinary person's perception of
"earth as earth" already introduces a slight distortion of
the object, a distortion that will be blown up into full-
fledged misinterpretation when the cognitive process
enters the phase of "conceiving." MA explains that the
ordinary person seizes upon the conventional expression
"it is earth," and applying this to the object, perceives it
through a "perversion of perception" (sahhavipallasa). The
latter is a technjcal expression explained as perceiving the
impermanent as permanent, the painful as pleasurable,
what is not self as self, and what is foul as beautiful
(AN 4:49/ii.52). Nm reads the ablative suffix -to of the
Pali as signifying derivation and translates the phrase:
"From earth he has a percept of earth."

The Pali verb "conceives" ( mahhati ), from the root man,
"to think," is often used in the Pali suttas to mean dis-
tortional thinking - thought that ascribes to its object
characteristics and a significance derived not from the
object itself, but from its own subjective imaginings.
The cognitive distortion introduced by conceiving con-
sists, in brief, in the intrusion of the egocentric perspec-
tive into the experience already slightly distorted by
spontaneous perception. According to the commentaries.



Notes to Sutta 1 1163


merits, which accounts for the different ways it comes to
manifestation - craving ( tanhft ), conceit (mdna), and
views ( ditthi ).

MA paraphrases this text thus: "Having perceived
earth with a perverted perception, the ordinary person
afterwards conceives it - construes or discriminates it -
through the gross proliferating tendencies ( papanca ) of
craving, conceit, and views, which are here called 'con-
ceivings. '...He apprehends it in diverse ways contrary
[to reality]."

The four ways of conceiving ( mannana ): The Buddha
shows that the conceiving of any object may occur in any
of four ways, expressed by the text as a fourfold linguistic
pattern: accusative, locative, ablative, and appropriative.
The primary significance of this modal pattern - enig-
matic in the Pali as well - seems to be ontological. I take
the pattern to represent the diverse ways in which the
ordinary person attempts to give positive being to his
imagined sense of egohood by positing, below the
threshold of reflection, a relationship between himself as
the subject of cognition and the perceived phenomenon
as its object. According to the fourfold pattern given, this
relationship may be one either of direct identification
("he conceives X"), or of inherence ("he conceives in X"),
or of contrast or derivation ("he conceives from X"), or of
simple appropriation ("he conceives X to be 'mine'").

But care is needed in interpreting these phrases. The
Pali does not supply any direct object for the second and
third modes, and this suggests that the process at work
in conceiving proceeds from a deeper and more general
level than that involved in the forming of an explicit
view of self, as described for example at MN 2.8 or
MN 44.7. The activity of conceiving thus seems to com-
prise the entire range of subjectively tinged cognition,
from the impulses and thoughts in which the sense of
personal identity is still inchoate to elaborate intellectual
structures in which it has been fully explicated.

Nm, however, understands the implicit object of con-
ceiving to be the percept itself, and accordingly translates:
"having had from earth a percept of earth, he conceives




1164 The Majjhima Nikaya

[that to be] earth, he conceives [that to be] in earth, he
conceives [that to be apart] from earth," etc.

The fifth phrase, "he delights in X," explicitly connects
conceiving with craving, which is elsewhere said to
"delight here and there." This, moreover, hints at the
danger in the worldling's thought processes, since crav-
ing is pointed to by the Buddha as the origin of suffering.

MA gives prolific examples illustrating all the differ-
ent modes of conceiving, and these clearly establish that
the intended object of conceiving is the misplaced sense
of egoity.

7 MA states that one who fully understands earth does
so by the three types of full understanding: the full
understanding of the known ( hataparihha ) - the defini-
tion of the earth element by way of its unique charac-
teristic, function, manifestation, and proximate cause;
the full understanding by scrutinization (tlranaparihha)
- the contemplation of the earth element by way of the
three general characteristics of impermanence, suffer-
ing, and non-self; and the full understanding of aban-
donment ( pahanaparinna ) - the abandoning of desire
and lust for the earth element through the supreme
path (of arahantship).

8 Bhuta. MA says that "beings" here signifies only living
beings below the heaven of the Four Great Kings, the
lowest of the sense-sphere heavens; the higher grades of
living beings are covered by the terms to follow. MA
exemplifies the application of the three types of conceiv-
ing to this situation as follows: When a person becomes
attached to beings as a result of sight, hearing, etc., or
desires rebirth in a certain class of beings, this is conceiv-
ing due to craving. When he ranks himself as superior,
equal, or inferior to others, this is conceiving due to con-
ceit. And when he thinks, "Beings are permanent, stable,
eternal," etc., this is conceiving due to views.

9 MA: The gods of the six sense-sphere heavenly worlds
are meant, except for Mara and his retinue in the heaven
of the gods who wield power over others' creations. See
the account of Buddhist cosmology in the Introduction,
pp. 31-33.

10 Prajapati, "lord of creation," is a name given by the


Notes to Sutta 1 1165


Vedas to Indra, Agni, etc., as the highest of the Vedic
divinities. But according to MA, Pajapati here is a name
for Mara because he is the ruler of this "generation"
(paja) made up of living beings.

11 Brahma here is Mahabrahma, the first deity to be born at
the beginning of a new cosmic cycle and whose lifespan
lasts for the entire cycle. The Ministers of Brahma and
the Assembly of Brahma - the other deities whose posi-
tion is determined by attainment of the first jhana - are
also included.

12 MA: By mentioning these, all beings occupying the plane
of the second jhana - the gods of Limited Radiance and
the gods of Immeasurable Radiance - should be includ-
ed, for all these occupy a single level.

13 MA: By mentioning these, all beings occupying the plane
of the third jhana - the gods of Limited Glory and the
gods of Immeasurable Glory - should be included.

14 These are divinities on the plane of the fourth jhana.

15 Abhibhu. MA says this term is a designation for the non-
percipient realm, called thus because it vanquishes
(abhibhavati) the four immaterial aggregates. The identifi-
cation sounds contrived, especially because the word
"abhibhu" is a masculine singular noun. Elsewhere
(MN 49.5) the word appears as part of Baka the Brahma's
claim to theocratic hegemony, yet MA rejects identifying
the Abhibhu with Brahma here as a redundancy.

16 This and the next three sections deal with conceiving in
relation to the four immaterial planes of existence - the
cosmological counterparts of the four immaterial medita-
tive attainments. With §18 the division of conceiving by
way of planes of existence is completed.

17 In these four sections the phenomena comprising person-
ality are considered as objects of perception classified
into the four categories of the seen, heard, sensed, and
cognized. Here, sensed ( muta ) signifies the data of smell,
taste, and touch, cognized ( vihhata ) the data of introspec-
tion, abstract thought, and imagination. The objects of
perception are "conceived" when they are cognized in
terms of "mine," "I," and "self," or in ways that generate
craving, conceit, and views.

18 In this section and the next, the phenomena comprising



1166 The Majjhima Nikaya




vim



personality are treated as twofold - by way of unity and
diversity. The emphasis on unity ( ekatta ), MA informs us,
is characteristic of one who attains the jhanas, in which
the mind occurs in a single mode on a single object. The
emphasis on diversity ( nanatta ) prevails in the case of the
non-attainer who lacks the overwhelming unitive experi-
ence of jhanas. Conceivings stressing diversity come to
expression in philosophies of pluralism, those stressing
unity in philosophies of the monistic type.

In this section, all phenomena of personality are collected
together and shown as singlefold. This idea of totality
can form the basis for philosophies of the pantheistic or
monistic type, depending on the relation posited
between the self and the all.

MA understands "Nibbana" here to refer to the five
kinds of "supreme Nibbana here and now" included
among the sixty-two wrong views of the Brahmajala
Sutta (DN 1 .3.19—25/1.36—38), that is, Nibbana identified
with the full enjoyment of sense pleasures or with the
four jhanas. Enjoying this state, or yearning for it, he con-
ceives it with craving. Priding himself on attaining it, he
conceives it with conceit. Holding this imaginary Nibbana
to be permanent, etc., he conceives it with views.

The sekha, the disciple in higher training, is one who has
reached any of the three lower planes of sanctity -
stream-entry, once-returning, or non-returning - but
must still train further in order to reach the goal, ara-
hantship, the supreme security from bondage. MN 53 is
devoted to expounding the training he must undertake.
The arahant is sometimes described as asekha, one
beyond training, in the sense that he has completed the
training in the Noble Eightfold Path. Nm rendered sekha
as "initiate" and asekha as "adept," which have been
changed here to avoid their "esoteric" connotations.

It should be noted that, whereas the ordinary man is
said to perceive each of the bases, the one in higher train-
ing is said to directly know them ( abhijanati ). MA explains
that he knows them with distinguished knowledge/
knows them in accordance with their real nature as
impermanent, suffering, and non-self. Nm rendered:


Notes to Sutta 1 1167


"From earth he has direct knowledge of earth."

23 The disciple in higher training is urged by the Buddha to
refrain from conceiving and delight because the disposi-
tions to these mental processes still remain within him.
With his attainment of stream-entry he eradicated the fet-
ter of personality view and thus can no longer conceive
in terms of wrong views. But the defilements of craving
and conceit are only uprooted by the path of arahantship,
and thus the sekha remains vulnerable to the conceivings
to which they are capable of giving rise. Whereas direct
knowledge ( abhihha ) is the province of both the sekha and
the arahant, full understanding (parinha) is the province
exclusively of the arahant, as it involves the full aban-
doning of all defilements.

24 This is the stock description of the arahant, repeated in
many suttas.

25 When ignorance has been abolished by the attainment of
full understanding, the subtlest dispositions to craving
and conceit are also eradicated. Thus the arahant can no
longer engage in conceiving and delight.

26 This section and the following two are stated to show
that the arahant does not conceive, not only because he
has fully understood the object, but because he has eradi-
cated the three unwholesome roots - lust (or greed), hate,
and delusion. The phrase "free from lust through the
destruction of lust" is used to stress that the arahant is
not merely temporarily without lust, but has destroyed it
at the most fundamental level. Similarly with hate and
delusion.

27 On this word, the epithet the Buddha uses most often
when referring to himself, see the Introduction, p. 24. The
commentaries give a long detailed etymology, into which
they try to compress virtually the entire Dhamma. The
passage has been translated in Bhikkhu Bodhi, Discourse
on the All-Embracing Net of Views, pp. 331-44.

28 Parihhatantarii tathagatassa. So BBS and SBJ eds. and MA,
though PTS ed. reads simply parinnatam. MA glosses:
"fully understood to the conclusion, fully understood to
the limit, fully understood without remainder." It
explains that while Buddhas and disciple-arahants are


1168 The Majjhima Nikaya


alike in abandoning all defilements, there is a distinction
in their range of full understanding: whereas disciples
can attain Nibbana after comprehending with insight
only a limited number of formations, Buddhas fully
understand all formations without exception.

29 This sentence gives a highly compressed statement of the
formula of dependent origination (paticca samnppada),
usually expounded in twelve factors (as in MN 38). As
interpreted by MA, "delight" is the craving of the previ-
ous life that brought into being the "suffering" of the five
aggregates in the present life, "being" the kammically
determinative aspect of the present life that causes future
birth, followed by future ageing and death. This passage
shows the cause for the Buddha's elimination of conceiv-
ing to be his penetration of dependent origination on the
night of his enlightenment. The mention of "delight"
(nandi) as the root of suffering links up with the sutta's
title; moreover, by referring to the earlier statement that
the ordinary person delights in earth, etc., it shows suf-
fering to be the ultimate consequence of delight.

30 MA explains the sequence of ideas thus: The Tathagata
does not conceive earth and does not delight in earth
because he has understood that delight is the root of suf-
fering. Further, by understanding dependent origina-
tion, he has completely abandoned the craving here
called "delight" and has awakened to supreme full
enlightenment. As a result he does not conceive earth or
delight in earth.

31 The bhikkhus did not delight in the Buddha's words,
apparently because the discourse probed too deeply into
the tender regions of their own conceit, and perhaps their
residual brahmanic views. At a later time, MA tells us,
when their pride had been humbled, the Buddha
expounded to these same bhikkhus the Gotamaka Sutta
(AN 3:123/i.276), in the course of which they all attained
arahantship.


32 The taints \asava), a category of defilements existing at


Notes to Sutta 2 1169


the deepest and most fundamental level, are discussed in
the Introduction, p. 38. MA explains that restraint
(s amvara) is fivefold: through virtue, mindfulness, knowl-
edge, energy, and patience. In the present sutta, restraint
through virtue is illustrated by avoiding unsuitable seats
and resorts (§19); restraint through mindfulness, by
restraining the sense faculties (§12); restraint through
knowledge, by the repeated phrase "reflecting wisely";
restraint through energy, by the removing of unwhole-
some thoughts (§20); and restraint through patience, by
the passage on enduring (§18).

33 Wise attention ( yoniso manasiktira) is glossed as attention
that is the right means ( upaya ), on the right track ( patha ).
It is explained as mental advertence, consideration, or
preoccupation that accords with the truth, namely, atten-
tion to the impermanent as impermanent, etc. Unwise
attention ( ayoniso manasikara) is attention that is the
wrong means, on the wrong track ( uppatha ), contrary to
the truth, namely, attention to the impermanent as per-
manent, the painful as pleasurable, what is not self as
self, and what is foul as beautiful. Unwise attention, MA
informs us, is at the root of the round of existence, for it
causes ignorance and craving to increase; wise attention
is at the root of liberation from the round, since it leads to
the development of the Noble Eightfold Path. MA sums
up the point of this passage thus: the destruction of the
taints is for one who knows how to arouse wise attention
and who sees to it that unwise attention does not arise.

34 Six of these - omitting the taints to be abandoned by see-
ing - are mentioned in the catechism on the taints in
AN 6:58/iii.387-90.

35 The word "seeing" ( dassana ) here refers to the first of the
four supramundane paths - the path of stream-entry
( sotctpattimagga ) - so designated because it offers the first
glimpse of Nibbana. The higher three paths are called the
paths of development ( bhUvana ) because they develop the
vision of Nibbana to the point at which all defilements
are eradicated.

36 MA makes the important point that there is no fixed
determination in things themselves as to whether they




1170 The Majjhima Nikaya


are fit or unfit for attention. The distinction consists,
rather, in the mode of attention. That mode of attention
that is a causal basis for unwholesome states of mind
should be avoided, while that mode of attention that is a
causal basis for wholesome states should be developed.
This same principle applies to §9.

37 MA illustrates the growth of the taints through unwise
attention as follows: When he attends to gratification in
the five cords of sensual pleasure, the taint of sensual
desire arises and increases; when he attends to gratifica-
tion in the exalted states (the jhanas), the taint of being
arises and increases; and when he attends to any mundane
things through the four "perversions" (of permanence,
etc. - see n.5), the taint of ignorance arises and increases.

38 According to MA, this passage is undertaken to show the
taint of views ( ditthasava , not expressly mentioned in the
discourse) under the heading of doubt. However, it
might be more correct to say that the taint of views, dis-
closed by §8, emerges out of unwise attention in the form
of doubt. The various types of doubt are already preg-
nant with the wrong views that will come to explicit
expression in the next section.

39 Of these six views, the first two represent the simple
antinomy of eternalism and annihilationism; the view
that "no self exists for me" is not the .non-self doctrine of
the Buddha, but the materialist view that identifies the
individual with the body and thus holds that there is no
personal continuity beyond death. The next three views
may be understood to arise out of the philosophically
more sophisticated observation that experience has a built-
in reflexive structure that allows for self-consciousness,
the capacity of the mind to become cognizant of itself, its
contents, and the body with which it is inter-connected.
Engaged in a search for his "true nature," the untaught
ordinary person will identify self either with both aspects
of the experience (view 3), or with the observer alone
(view 4), or with the observed alone (view 5). The last
view is a full-blown version of eternalism in which all
reservations have been discarded.

40 The self as speaker represents the conception of the self
as the agent of action; the self as feeler, the conception


Notes to Sutta 2 1171


of the self as the passive subject. "Here and there" sug-
gests the self as the transmigrating entity that retains its
identity through a succession of different incarnations.
The same view is maintained by the bhikkhu Sati at
MN 38.2.

41 This is, of course, the formula for the Four Noble Truths,
treated as a subject of contemplation and insight. MA
says that up to the attainment of the path of stream-
entry, attention denotes insight ( vipassana ), but at the
moment of the path it denotes path-knowledge. Insight
directly apprehends the first two truths, since its objec-
tive range is the mental and material phenomena com-
prised under dukkha and its origin; it can know the latter
two truths only inferentially. Path-knowledge makes the
truth of cessation its object, apprehending it by penetra-
tion as object ( arammana ). Path-knowledge performs four
functions regarding the four truths: it fully understands
the truth of suffering, abandons the origin of suffering,
realises the cessation of suffering, and develops the way
to the cessation of suffering.

42 The path of stream-entry has the function of cutting off
the first three fetters binding to samsara. MA says that
personality view and adherence to rules and obser-
vances, being included in the taint of views, are taints as
well as fetters, while doubt is (ordinarily) classified as
only a fetter, not a taint; but because it is included here
among the "taints to be abandoned by seeing," it may be
spoken of as a taint.

43 If abandonment of the taints is understood in the strict
sense as their ultimate destruction, then only two of the
seven methods mentioned in the sutta effect their aban-
donment - seeing and development - which between
them comprise the four supramundane paths. The other
five methods cannot directly accomplish the destruction
of the taints, but they can keep them under control during
the preparatory stages of practice and thereby facilitate
their eventual eradication by the supramundane paths.

44 The primary factor responsible for exercising this
restraint over the sense faculties is mindfulness. A fuller
formula for sense restraint is given in many other suttas -
e.g., MN 27.15 - and analysed in detail at Vsm I, 53-59.


1172 The Majjhima Nikaya

MA explains "fever" ( parilaha ) in the above passage as
the fever of defilements and of their (kammic) results.

45 The passages that follow here have become the standard
formulas that bhikkhus use in their daily reflections
upon the four requisites of the holy life. They are
explained in detail at Vsm I, 85-97.

46 Unsuitable seats are the two kinds mentioned in the
Patimokkha - sitting with a woman on a screened seat
convenient for sexual intercourse, and sitting alone with
a woman in a private place. Various kinds of unsuitable
resort are mentioned at Vsm I, 45.

47 The first three types of unwholesome thought - of sensual
desire, ill will, and cruelty - constitute wrong thought or
wrong intention, the opposite of the second factor of the
Noble Eightfold Path. The three types of wrong thought
and their opposites are dealt with more fully in MN 19.

48 These are the seven enlightenment factors (satta
bojjhanga ) included among the thirty-seven requisites of
enlightenment, and treated more extensively below at
MN 10.42 and MN 118.29-40. The present section
explains the seven enlightenment factors specifically as
aids for developing the three higher supramundane
paths, by which the taints that escaped eradication by the
first path will be eradicated. The terms "seclusion" ( vive -
ka), "dispassion" {virago), and "cessation" ( nirodha ) may
all be understood as referring to Nibbana. Their use in
this context signifies that the development of the enlight-
enment factors is directed to Nibbana as its goal during
the preparatory stages of the path, and as its object with
the attainment of the supramundane paths. MA explains
that the word vossagga, rendered as "relinquishment,"
has the two meanings of "giving up" {pariccaga), i.e., the
abandonment of defilements, and "entering into"
(pakkhandana), i.e., culminating in Nibbana.

49 The taint of sensual desire is eradicated by the path of
non-returning, the taints of being and of ignorance only
by the final path, that of arahantship.

50 The ten fetters that must be destroyed to gain full deliv-
erance have been enumerated in the Introduction,
pp. 42-43. Conceit, at the most subtle level, is the conceit


Notes to Suttas 2 and 3 1173


"I am," which lingers in the mental continuum until the
attainment of arahantship. The "penetration of conceit"
( mCLnabhisamaya ) means seeing through conceit and aban-
doning it, which are both accomplished simultaneously
by the path of arahantship. The bhikkhu has "made an
end of suffering" in the sense that he has put an end to
the suffering of the round of samsara ( vattadukkha ).

sutta3

51 MA: The Buddha delivered this sutta because many
bhikkhus were becoming elated over the gains and hon-
our accruing to the Sangha, to the neglect of their spiritu-
al training. The Buddha obviously could not lay down a
training rule prohibiting the use of the requisites, but he
wanted to show the practice of the heirs in Dhamma to
those bhikkhus who were earnestly desirous of training.

52 MA explains that these five qualities gradually fulfil all
the stages of the practice culminating in arahantship.

53 Elder bhikkhus {them) are those with more than ten rainy
seasons since ordination ( upasampada ); middle bhikkhus
have between five and nine rains; new bhikkhus less
than five rains.

54 The evil qualities mentioned here, and in the sections
that follow, are introduced to show the states referred to
above (§6) by the statement: "They do not abandon what
the Teacher tells them to abandon." They are also the fac-
tors that induce a bhikkhu to become an heir of material
things rather than an heir of Dhamma. In MN 7.3 the
same sixteen qualities, with "ill will" substituted for
"hate," are referred to as "the imperfections that defile
the mind" (cittass' upakkilesa).

55 The Noble Eightfold Path is introduced here to show the
practice that makes one an "heir in Dhamma." The
antithesis between the defilements and the path restates,
from a new angle, the contrast between "heirs in material
things" and "heirs in Dhamma" with which the Buddha
had opened the sutta.


1174 The Majjhima Nikaya


sutta4

56 MA says that Janussoni was not a given name but an
honorific title meaning "royal chaplain" ( purohita )
bestowed on him by the king. MN 27 is also addressed to
the brahmin Janussoni.

57 Bhoto Gotamassa s a janata ditthanugatim apajjati. Nm ren-
ders: "Do these people follow the implications of Master
Gotama's view?" And Horner: "These people emulate
the views of the honoured Gotama" (MLS 1:22). MA,
too, glosses: "These people have the same view, opinion,
outlook as Master Gotama." However, it makes much
better sense in this context to read dittha not as a sandhi
form of ditthi, but as the past participle, and to take this
phrase as meaning "following what they have seen of
him," i.e., his example. This meaning is clearly required
by the phrase in its appearances at SN ii.203, AN i.126,
AN iii.108, 251, 422.

58 Nm originally had rendered this phrase as "perfect in
understanding," and the corresponding phrase in the
preceding section as "perfect in concentration."
However, since it seems inappropriate to ascribe perfec-
tion in samadhi and pahha to the Bodhisatta prior to his
enlightenment, I have chosen to render the suffix sam-
panna throughout as "possessed of." MA explains that
this is neither the wisdom of insight nor of the path, but
the wisdom that defines the nature of its object
(arammanavavatthdnapanna).

59 The Indian year, according to the ancient system inherit-
ed by Buddhism, is divided into three seasons - the cold
season, the hot season, and the rainy season - each last-
ing for four months. The four months are subdivided
into eight fortnights ( pakkha ), the third and the seventh
containing fourteen days and the others fifteen days.
Within each fortnight, the nights of the full moon and the
new moon (either the fourteenth or fifteenth) and the
night of the half-moon (the eighth) are regarded as espe-
cially auspicious. Within Buddhism these days become
the Uposatha, the days of religious observance. On the
full moon and new moon days the bhikkhus recite their


Notes to Sutta 4 1175


code of precepts and lay people visit the monasteries to
listen to sermons and to practise meditation.

60 The four postures (iriijapatha) often mentioned in the Bud-
dhist texts are walking, standing, sitting, and lying down.

61 Beginning with this section, the Buddha shows the course
of practice that led him to the peak of non-delusion.

62 MA says that the Bodhisatta developed the four jhanas
using mindfulness of breathing as his meditation subject.

63 Explained in detail at Vsm XIII, 13-71.

64 Explained in detail at Vsm XIII, 72-101.

65 MA: Having shown the Four Noble Truths in their own
nature (that is, in terms of suffering), the passage on the
taints is stated to show them indirectly by way of the
defilements.

66 According to MA, the phrase "When I knew and saw
thus" refers to insight and the path, which reaches its cli-
max in the path of arahantship; the phrase "my mind
was liberated" shows the moment of the fruit; and the
phrase "there came the knowledge: 'It is liberated'"
shows reviewing knowledge (see Vsm XXII, 20-21), as
does the next sentence beginning "I directly knew."

67 This is the stock canonical announcement of final knowl-
edge or arahantship. MA explains that the statement
"Birth is destroyed" means that any type of birth that
might have arisen if the path had not been developed has
been rendered incapable of arising by the development
of the path. The "holy life" that has been lived is the holy
life of the path ( maggabrahmacariya ). The phrase "what
had to be done has been done" ( katam karanlyam) indi-
cates that the four tasks of the noble path - fully under-
standing suffering, abandoning its origin, realising its
cessation, and developing the path - have now all been
completed for each of the four supramundane paths. The
fourth phrase, naparam itthattaya, is glossed by MA thus:
"Now there is no need for me to develop the path again
for 'such a state,' i.e., for the sixteenfold function (of the
path) or for the destruction of the defilements. Or alter-
natively: after 'such a state/ i.e., the continuum of aggre-
gates now occurring, there is no further continuum of
aggregates for me. These five aggregates, having been


1176 The Majjhima Nikdya


fully understood, stand like trees that are cut at the root.
With the cessation of the last consciousness, they will be
extinguished like a fire without fuel." I have opted for
the second of these interpretations, but take itthattaya as a
dative. The word, which literally means "the state of
this" or "the state of thus," implies manifestation in a
concrete state of existence. Nm had rendered: "There is
no more of this beyond."

68 MA: He has "compassion for future generations" insofar as
later generations of monks, seeing that the Buddha resort-
ed to forest dwellings, will follow his example and thus
hasten their progress towards making an end of suffering.


MA, picking up on the venerable Sariputta's use of the
word "person" (puggala ), explains that the Buddha has a
twofold teaching - a conventional teaching ( sammuti -
desana) expressed in terms of persons, beings, women,
and men, etc.; and an ultimate teaching ( paramatthadesand )
expressed solely in terms that possess ultimate ontologi-
cal validity, such as aggregates, elements, sense bases,
impermanent, suffering, not self, etc. The Buddha
expounds his teaching through whichever approach is
best suited to gnable the hearer to penetrate the meaning,
dispel delusion, and achieve distinction. The use of the
word "person," therefore, does not imply a misconcep-
tion of the person as a self.

Subhanimitta: an attractive object that is the basis for lust.
The Buddha says that unwise attention to the sign of the
beautiful is the nutriment ( ahara ) for the arising of
unarisen sensual desire and for the growth and increase
of arisen sensual desire (SN 46:2/v.64).

These are strict ascetic practices. The forest dweller,
almsfood eater, house-to-house seeker and refuse-rag
wearer are explained in Vsm II.

These are "softer" practices than those referred to in §29,
generally regarded as signs of a less earnest commitment
to exertion for the sake of the goal.

The Ajlvakas, or Ajlvikas, were a rival sect whose teach-
ing emphasised severe austerities based on a philosophy


Notes to Suttas 5 and 6 1177


bordering on fatalism. See Basham, History and Doctrines
of the Ajivikas.

74 The possessive pronouns qualifying heart are not in the
Pali, but the sense of the phrase has to be understood by
consideration of the simile. Just as Samlti planed the
faults out of the felloe as if he knew Panduputta's heart
with his own heart, so does Sariputta plane out the faults
of the bhikkhus as if he knew Moggallana's wish to have
them removed. MLS (1:40) misses the point by translat-
ing: "because he knows their hearts with his heart," tak-
ing the first reference to be to the monks rather than to
Ven. Moggallana.

75 Mahanaga. The nagas are a class of dragonlike beings in
Indian mythology believed to inhabit the nether regions of
the earth and to be the guardians of hidden treasures. The
word comes to represent any gigantic or powerful crea-
ture, such as a tusker elephant or a cobra and, by exten-
sion, an arahant bhikkhu. See Dhp, ch. 23, Nagavagga.

SUTTA 6

76 MA says that the expression sampannasila, translated here
as "possessed of virtue," can mean either "perfect in
virtue" ( paripunnasilQ ) or "endowed with virtue" (s ilasam-
angino). The Patimokkha is the code of monastic disci-
pline, which in its Pali version consists of 227 rules.
"Resort" igocara) implies a proper resort for alms, though
it may also signify the proper deportment of a monk, his
serene and self-possessed bearing. The key terms in this
passage are analysed at Vsm I, 43-52.

77 MA: The passage beginning with "let him fulfil the pre-
cepts," repeated for each of the following sections until
the end of the sutta, comprises the entire threefold
training. The phrase about fulfilling the precepts signi-
fies the training in higher virtue ( adhisilasikkha ); the
phrase "be devoted to internal serenity of mind, not
neglect meditation" indicates the training in concentra-
tion or the higher mind ( adhicittasikkha ); and the phrase
"be possessed of insight" points to the training in the
higher wisdom ( adhipahhasikkhd ). The phrase "dwell in
empty huts" combines the latter two trainings, since one



! 1178 The Majjhima Nikaya

resorts to an empty hut to develop serenity and insight.

78 That is, if the relatives who have been reborn in the realm
of ghosts or in some lower deva realm recollect virtuous
bhikkhus with confidence, that confidence will become a
source of merit for them, protecting them from bad
rebirths and becoming a positive condition for the attain-
ment of Nibbana.

79 These are the four immaterial attainments for which the
full formulas are to be found below at MN 8.8-11,
MN 25.16-19, etc. MA glosses "body" as "mental body"
(• namakaya ).

80 The three fetters destroyed by the stream-enterer are per-
sonality view, doubt, and adherence to rules and obser-
vances, as mentioned at MN 2.11.

81 In addition to the first three fetters, the non-returner
destroys the other two "lower fetters" of sensual desire
and ill will. The non-returner is reborn in a special region
of the Brahma-world called the Pure Abodes, and there
makes an end of suffering.

82 §§14-19 present the six kinds of direct knowledge
(abhinha). See Introduction, p. 37; for details, see Vsm XII
and XIII.

83 MA: In this passage "mind" and "wisdom" signify,
respectively, the concentration and wisdom associated
with the fruit of arahantship. Concentration is called
"deliverance of mind" ( cetovimutti ) because it is liberated
from lust; wisdom is called "deliverance by wisdom"
( pahnavimutti ) because it is liberated from ignorance. The
former is normally the result of serenity, the latter the
result of insight. But when they are coupled and
described as taintless ( anasava ), they jointly result from
the destruction of the taints by the supra mundane path
of arahantship.

SUTTA 7

84 For a more thorough treatment of this sutta and the fol-
lowing one, with helpful introductions and lengthy
explanatory notes, see Nyanaponika Thera, The Simile of
the Cloth and The Discourse on Effacement .



Notes to Sutta 7 1179


85 An unhappy destination ( duggati ) is rebirth in the three
states of deprivation - hell, the animal kingdom, and the
realm of ghosts. A happy destination ( sugati ), mentioned
just below, is rebirth in a superior state among humans
and in the heavenly worlds.

86 Cittassa upakkilesa. The word upakkile sfi is sometimes used
in the sense of blemishes or imperfections of meditative
concentration, as at MN 128.27, 30; sometimes in the
sense of blemishes or imperfections of insight, as at
Vsm XX, 105; and sometimes to signify the minor defile-
ments that arise from the three unwholesome roots -
greed, hate, and delusion - either as their modes or their
offshoots. Here it is used in this third sense, but to main-
tain the connection with its first two usages, it has been
translated by the phrase "imperfections that defile the
mind."

87 MA offers several tentative distinctions between cov-
etousness ( abhijjha ) and unrighteous greed ( visamalobha ),
but then it points out that since, from the standpoint of
the higher training, all greed is unrighteous, the two
terms can be understood as merely different names for
the same mental factor, greed or lust.

88 MA says that the abandoning spoken of here should be
understood as "abandonment by eradication" ( samuc -
chedappahana), that is, complete uprooting by the supra-
mundane path. The sixteen defilements are abandoned
by the noble paths in the following order:

1. The path of stream-entry abandons: contempt, a domi-
neering attitude, envy, avarice, deceit, fraud.

2. The path of non-returning abandons: ill will, anger,
revenge, negligence.

3. The path of arahantship abandons: covetousness and
unrighteous greed, obstinacy, presumption, conceit,
arrogance, vanity.

MA maintains, by reference to an ancient exegetical
source, that in this passage the path of the non-returner is
being described. Therefore we must understand that
those defilements to be fully abandoned by the path of
arahantship have at this point only been abandoned in
part, by way of their coarser manifestations.



1180 The Majjhima Nikaya


89 Perfect confidence ( aveccappasdda ) in the Buddha, the
Dhamma, and the Sangha is an attribute of a noble disci-
ple at the minimal level of a stream-enterer, whose confi-
dence is perfect because he has seen the truth of the
Dhamma for himself. The formulas for recollection of the
Buddha, Dhamma, and Sangha given here are explained
at length in Vsm VII.

90 This translation follows the reading yatodhi and MA's
explanation of this as the partial abandoning of defile-
ments by the first three paths, contrasted with the total
(i anodhi ) abandoning of defilements by the fourth and
final path. Nm, following the reading yathodhi, translates:
"And whatever [from among those imperfections] has,
according to the limitation [set by whichever of the first
three paths he has attained], been given up, has been
[forever] dropped, let go, abandoned, relinquished."

91 Labhati atthavedam labhati dhammavedam. Ven. Nyana-
ponika renders: "He gains enthusiasm for the goal, gains
enthusiasm for the Dhamma." MA explains veda as
meaning joy and the knowledge connected with that joy,
and says: "Atthaveda is the inspiration arisen in one who
reviews his perfect confidence; dhammaveda is the inspira-
tion arisen in one who reviews the abandonment of the
defilements in part, the cause of that perfect confidence."

92 The Pali equivalents, in noun form, for the terms in this
series are: pamdjja, gladness; piti, rapture; passaddhi, tran-
quillity; sukha, pleasure; samadhi, concentration.
Tranquillity, by removing the subtle bodily and mental
disturbances connected with gladness and rapture,
brings the serene pleasure that prepares the mind for
deepened concentration.

93 The Pali terms are: evamsllo evamdhammo evathpahho. The
middle term, in this context, obviously must refer to the
second stage of the threefold training, concentration,
though it is puzzling why samadhi itself is not used. The
commentary to MN 123.2 glosses a parallel expression by
samadhi-pakkha-dhamma, "states belonging to concentra-
tion."

94 This statement underscores his attainment of the stage of
non-returner. Since the non-returner has eradicated sen-


Notes to Sutta 7 1181


sual desire, delicious food cannot impede him in his
quest for the final path and fruit.

95 §§13-16 present the standard sutta formulas for the four
"divine abodes" ( brahmavihara ). Briefly, loving-kindness
(metta) is the wish for the welfare and happiness of oth-
ers; compassion ( karuna ), the empathy with them in their
suffering; appreciative joy ( mudita ), rejoicing in their
virtues and success; and equanimity ( upekkha ), the atti-
tude of detached impartiality towards beings (not apathy
or indifference). For a fuller treatment, see Vsm IX.

96 MA: The present section shows the non-returner's practice
of insight meditation aimed at arahantship and the fol-
lowing section his attainment of arahantship. The phrase
"there is this" signifies the truth of suffering; "there is the
inferior," the origin of suffering; "the superior," the truth
of the path; and "the escape from this whole field of per-
ception" is Nibbana, the cessation of suffering.

97 MA: The Buddha used this phrase to arouse the atten-
tion of the brahmin Sundarika Bharadvaja, who was in
the assembly and believed in purification by ritual
bathing. The Buddha foresaw that the brahmin would
be inspired to take ordination under him and would
attain arahantship.

98 These are rivers and fords that were popularly believed
to give purification.

99 The Pali has phaggu, a day of brahmanical purification in
the month of Phagguna (February-March), and uposatha,
the religious observance days regulated by the lunar cal-
endar. See n.59.

100 The going forth (pabbajja) is the formal ordination of
entering the homeless life as a novice ( samanera ); the full
admission ( upasampadct ) confers the status of a bhikkhu, a
full member of the Sangha.

SUTTA 8

101 See n.84.

102 Views associated with doctrines of a self (attavadapati-
samyutta), according to MA, are the twenty types of per-


1182 The Majjhima Nikaya


sonality view enumerated at MN 44.7, though they may
also be understood to include the more elaborate doc-
trines about a self discussed in MN 102. Views associat-
ed with doctrines about the world ( lokavadapatisamyutta )
are the eight views: the world is eternal, non-eternal,
both, or neither; the world is infinite, finite, both, or nei-
ther. See MN 63 and MN 72 for the Buddha's rejection of
these views.

103 MA: This question refers to one who has only reached
the initial stages of insight meditation without attaining
stream-entry. The type of abandonment under discussion
is abandoning by eradication, which is effected only by
the path of stream-entry. Ven. Maha Cunda posed this
question because some meditators were overestimating
their achievement, thinking they had abandoned such
views while they had not really eradicated them.

104 MA explains that the word "arise" (uppajjanti) refers here
to the arising of views that have not arisen before;
"underlie" ( anusenti ) to their gathering strength through
continued adherence to them; and being "exercised"
(samudacaranti) to their gaining bodily or verbal expres-
sion. The "object" upon which they are based is the five
aggregates ( khandha ) that constitute a person or living
being - material form, feeling, perception, mental forma-
tions, and consciousness.

105 By this statement 1 the Buddha shows the means by which
these views are eradicated: contemplation of the five
aggregates as "not mine," etc., with the wisdom of
insight culminating in the path of stream-entry.

106 MA explains that the Buddha, having answered the
Elder's question, now speaks of another type of overesti-
mater - those who attain the eight meditative attainments
and believe that they are practising true effacement
(sallekha). The word sallekha, originally meaning austerity
or ascetic practice, is used by the Buddha to signify the
radical effacing or removal of defilements. Though the
eight attainments are elsewhere placed securely within
the Buddhist training (see MN 25.12-19, MN 26.34—41),
it is here said that they should not be called effacement
because the bhikkhu who attains them does not use


Notes to Sutta 8 1183


them as a basis for insight - as described for example in
MN 52 and MN 64 - but only as a means of enjoying
bliss and peace.

107 The forty-four "modes of effacement" to be expounded
fall, by and large, into several fixed sets of doctrinal cate-
gories as follows. Those not mentioned here do not fit
into any fixed set.

(2)— (11) are the ten courses of unwholesome and whole-
some action ( kammapatha ) - see MN 9.4, 9.6;

(12)— (18) are the last seven factors of the eightfold path
- wrong and right - the first factor being identical
with (11);

(19)-(20) are sometimes added to the two eightfold
paths - see MN 117.34—36;

(21)-(23) are the last three of the five hindrances - see
MN 10.36 - the first two being identical with (9)
and (10);

(24)-(33) are ten of the sixteen imperfections that defile
the mind, mentioned in MN 7.3;

(37)-(43) are the seven bad qualities and the seven good
qualities (saddhamma) mentioned in MN 53.11-17.

108 MT: Non-cruelty (avihimsa), which is a synonym for com-
passion, is mentioned at the beginning because it is the
root of all virtues, especially the root-cause of morality.

109 MA: This is a description of those who hold firmly to a
view that has occurred to them, believing "This alone is
the truth"; they do not relinquish it even if spoken to by
the Buddha with reasoned arguments.

110 MA: The inclination of mind is of great benefit because it
entails exclusively welfare and happiness, and because it
is the cause of the subsequent actions that conform to it.

111 The Pali term rendered by "extinguished" is parinibbuto,
which can also mean "attained to Nibbana"; and the Pali
term rendered by "help extinguish" is parinibbdpessati,
which can also mean "help attain Nibbana" or "bring to
Nibbana." The Pali original for the expression to follow,
"by which to extinguish it," parinibbanaya, might have
been rendered "for attaining Nibbana." Though in all
three cases the alternative rendering would be too strong
to insist on literally, its implications contribute to the


1184 The Majjhima Nikaya


suggestiveness of the original in a way that cannot be
captured in translation.

112 MA points out that this statement can be understood in
two ways: (1) one who is himself free from cruelty can
use his non-cruelty to help extinguish the cruelty of
another person; and (2) one who is himself cruel can
develop non-cruelty to extinguish his own cruel disposi-
tion. All the following cases should be similarly under-
stood in this twofold way.

113 MA: The compassionate teacher's task is the correct
teaching of the Dhamma; beyond that is the practice,
which is the work of the disciples.

sutta9

114 MA: Right view is twofold: mundane and supramun-
dane. Mundane right view is again twofold: the view
that kamma produces its fruits, which may be held both
by Buddhists and outsiders, and the view that accords
with the Four Noble Truths, which is exclusive to the
Buddha's Dispensation. Supramundane right view is the
understanding of the Four Noble Truths attained by pen-
etrating to the four paths and fruits of sanctity. The ques-
tion posed by the Ven. Sariputta concerns the sekha, the
disciple in higher training, who possesses supramundane
right view leading irreversibly to emancipation. This is
implied by the phrase "perfect confidence" and "arrived
at this true Dhamma."

115 Here the unwholesome ( akusala ) is explained by the ten
unwholesome courses of action. The first three of these
pertain to bodily action, the middle four to verbal action,
the last three to mental action. The ten are explained at
greater length at MN 41.8-10.

116 These three are called the roots of the unwholesome
because they motivate all unwholesome actions. For a
thorough and informative textual study of these factors
and their opposites, see Nyanaponika Thera, The Roots of
Good and Evil .

117 These ten wholesome courses of action are elaborated
upon in MN 41.12-14.


Notes to Sutta 9 1185


118 MA explains the disciple's understanding of these four
terms by way of the Four Noble Truths thus: all the courses
of action are the truth of suffering; the wholesome and
unwholesome roots are the truth of the origin; the non-
occurrence of both actions and their roots is the truth of
cessation; and the noble path that realises cessation is the
truth of the path. To this extent a noble disciple at one of
the first three stages has been described - one who has
arrived at supramundane right view but has not yet
eliminated all defilements.

119 The passage from "he entirely abandons the underlying
tendency to lust" until "he makes an end of suffering"
shows the work accomplished by the paths of the non-
returner and of arahantship - the elimination of the most
subtle and obstinate defilements and the achievement of
final knowledge. Here, the underlying tendencies to sen-
sual lust and aversion are eliminated by the path of the
non-returner, the underlying tendency to the view and
conceit "I am" and ignorance by the path of arahantship.
MA explains that the expression "underlying tendency to
the view and conceit 'I am"' (astm ti ditthimananusaya)
should be interpreted to mean the underlying tendency
to conceit that is similar to a view because, like the view
of self, it occurs apprehending the notion "I am."

120 Nutriment ( ahara ) is to be understood here in a broad
sense as a prominent condition for the individual life-
continuity. Physical food ( kabalinkdra ahara) is an impor-
tant condition for the physical body, contact for feeling,
mental volition for consciousness, and consciousness for
mentality-materiality, the psychophysical organism in its
totality. Craving is called the origin of nutriment in that
the craving of the previous existence is the source of the
present individuality with its dependence upon and con-
tinual consumption of the four nutriments in this exis-
tence. For an annotated compilation of the canonical and
commentarial texts on the nutriments, see Nyanaponika
Thera, The Four Nutriments of Life.

121 The next twelve sections present, in reverse order, a fac-
tor-by-factor examination of dependent origination. The
principal terms of the formula are explained briefly in the


1 186 The Majjhima Nikctya


Introduction, pp. 30-31. The detailed exegesis is in
Vsm XVII. Here each factor is patterned after the Four
Noble Truths.

122 This refers to the five aggregates. See MN 10.38 and
MN 44.2.

123 The six bases for contact are enumerated at §50 below.

124 The three kinds of being are explained in the Intro-
duction, pp. 46—18, in the discussion of Buddhist cosmol-
ogy. Here, by "being" should be understood both the
actual planes of rebirth and the types of kamma that
generate rebirth into those planes.

125 Clinging to rules and observances is the adherence to the
view that purification can be achieved by adopting cer-
tain external rules or following certain observances, par-
ticularly of ascetic self-discipline; clinging to a doctrine of
self is synonymous with personality view in one or
another of its twenty forms (see MN 44.7); clinging to
views is the clinging to all other types of views except the
two mentioned separately. Clinging in any of its varieties
represents a strengthening of craving, its condition.

126 Craving for mind-objects ( dhammatanha ) is the craving for
all objects of consciousness except the objects of the five
kinds of sense consciousness. Examples would be the
craving for fantasies and mental imagery, for abstract
ideas and intellectual systems, for feelings and emotional
states, etc. '

127 Contact (phassa) is explained at MN 18.16 as the meeting
of sense faculty, its object, and consciousness.

128 Mind-base ( manayatana ) is a collective term for all classes
of consciousness. One part of this base - the "life contin-
uum" ( bhavanga ) or subliminal consciousness - is the
"door" for the arising of mind-consciousness. See n.130.

129 Mentality-materiality ( namarupa ) is an umbrella term for
the psychophysical organism exclusive of consciousness.
The five mental factors mentioned under nama are
indispensable to consciousness and thus pertain to all
conscious experience. The four great elements concretely
represent matter's essential properties of solidity, cohe-
sion, heat, and distension. The material form derived
from the elements includes, according to the Abhidham-


Notes to Suttas 9 and 10 1187


ma analysis, the sensitive substance of the five sense fac-
ulties; four sense objects - colour, sound, smell, and taste
(tangibles being the three elements of earth, fire, and air);
the physical life faculty, nutritive essence, sex determina-
tion, and other types of material phenomena. See also the
Introduction, p. 56.

130 Mind-consciousness ( manovinfiana ) comprises all con-
sciousness except the five types of sense consciousness
just mentioned. It includes consciousness of mental
images, abstract ideas, and internal states of mind, as
well as the consciousness in reflection upon sense objects.

131 In the context of the doctrine of dependent origination,
formations ( sankhara ) are wholesome and unwholesome
volitions, or, in short, kamma. The bodily formation is
volition that is expressed through the body, the verbal
formation volition that is expressed by speech, and the
mental formation volition that remains internal without
coming to bodily or verbal expression.

132 It should be noted that while ignorance is a condition for
the taints, the taints - which include the taint of igno-
rance - are in turn a condition for ignorance. MA says
that this conditioning of ignorance by ignorance should
be understood to mean that the ignorance in any one
existence is conditioned by the ignorance in the preced-
ing existence. Since this is so, the conclusion follows that
no first point can be discovered for ignorance, and thus
that samsara is without discernible beginning.

sutta 10

133 This is one of the most important suttas in the Pali
Canon, containing the most comprehensive statement of
the most direct way to the attainment of the Buddhist
goal. Virtually the identical sutta is found as well at
DN 22, though with an expanded analysis of the Four
Noble Truths attached, which accounts for its greater
length. The sutta, its commentary, and copious extracts
from its difficult but illuminating subcommentary have
been presented together in translation by Soma Thera in
The Way of Mindfulness. A very readable translation of the


1188 The Majjhima Nikaya


sutta, with a modern commentary excelling in clarity and
depth, will be found in Nyanaponika Thera, The Heart of
Buddhist Meditation.

134 This town is said by some scholars to have been in the
vicinity of modern Delhi.

135 The Pali reads ekayano ayam bhikkhave maggo, and virtually
all translators understand this as a statement upholding
satipatthana as an exclusive path. Thus Ven. Soma renders
it: "This is the only way, O bhikkhus/' and Ven.
Nyanaponika: "This is the sole way, monks." Nm, how-
ever, points out that ekdyana magga at MN 12.37-42 has
the unambiguous contextual meaning of "a path that
goes in one way only," and so he rendered the phrase in
this passage, too. The expression used here, "the direct
path," is an attempt to preserve this meaning in a more
streamlined phrasing. MA explains ekayana magga as a
single path, not a divided path; as a way that has to be
walked by oneself alone, without a companion; and as a
way that goes to one goal, Nibbana. Though there is nei-
ther canonical nor commentarial basis for this view, it
might be maintained that satipatthana is called ekhyana
magga, the direct path, to distinguish it from the
approach to meditative attainment that proceeds through
the jhanas or brahmaviharas. While the latter can lead to
Nibbana, they dp not do so necessarily but can lead to
sidetracks, whereas satipatthana leads invariably to the
final goal.

136 The word satipatthana is a compound term. The first part,
sati, originally meant "memory," but in Pali Buddhist
usage it far more frequently bears the meaning of atten-
tiveness directed to the present - hence the makeshift
rendering "mindfulness." The second part is explained in
two ways: either as a shortened form of npattMna, mean-
ing "setting up" or "establishing" - here, of mindfulness;
or as patthana, meaning "domain" or "foundation" -
again, of mindfulness. Thus the four satipatthanas may be
understood as either the four ways of setting up mindful-
ness or as the four objective domains of mindfulness, to
be amplified in the rest of the sutta. The former seems to
be the etymologically correct derivation (confirmed by


Notes to Sutta 10 1189


the Sanskrit smjyupasthana), but the Pali commentators,
while admitting both explanations, have a predilection
for the latter.

137 MA says that in this context, "bhikkhu" is a term indicat-
ing a person who earnestly endeavours to accomplish the
practice of the teaching: "Whoever undertakes that prac-
tice . . .is here comprised under the term 'bhikkhu.'"

138 The repetition in the phrase "contemplating the body as
a body" (kaye kayanupassl), according to MA, has the pur-
pose of precisely determining the object of contemplation
and of isolating that object from others with which it
might be confused. Thus, in this practice, the body
should be contemplated as such, and not one's feelings,
ideas, and emotions concerning it. The phrase also means
that the body should be contemplated simply as a body
and not as a man, a woman, a self, or a living being.
Similar considerations apply to the repetitions in the case
of each of the other three foundations of mindfulness.
"Covetousness and grief," MA says, stands for sensual
desire and ill will, the principal hindrances that must be
overcome for the practice to succeed, enumerated sepa-
rately below in §36.

139 The structure of this sutta is fairly simple. Following the
preamble, the body of the discourse falls into four parts
by way of the four foundations of mindfulness:

I. Contemplation of the body, which comprises fourteen
exercises: mindfulness of breathing; contemplation
of the four postures; full awareness; attention to
foulness; attention to the elements; and nine "char-
nel ground contemplations" - reflection on corpses
in different stages of decomposition.

II. Contemplation of feeling, considered one exercise.

III. Contemplation of mind, also one exercise.

IV. Contemplation of mind-objects, which has five subdivi-
sions - the five hindrances; the five aggregates; the
six sense bases; the seven enlightenment factors; and
the Four Noble Truths.

Thus the sutta expounds altogether twenty-one exer-
cises in contemplation. Each exercise in turn has two
aspects: the basic exercise, explained first, and a supple-


1190 The Majjhima Nikftya


mentary section on insight (essentially the same for all
the exercises), which indicates how the contemplation is
to be developed to deepen understanding of the phe-
nomenon under investigation.

Finally the sutta concludes with a statement of assur-
ance in which the Buddha personally vouches for the
effectiveness of the method by declaring the fruits of con-
tinuous practice to be either arahantship or non-returning.

140 The practice of mindfulness of breathing ( anapanasati )
involves no deliberate attempt to regulate the breath, as
in hatha yoga, but a sustained effort to fix awareness on
the breath as it moves in and out in its natural rhythm.
Mindfulness is set up at the nostrils or the upper lip,
wherever the impact of the breath is felt most distinctly;
the length of the breath is noted but not consciously con-
trolled. The complete development of this meditation
method is expounded in MN 118. For an organised col-
lection of texts on this subject, see Bhikkhu Nanamoli,
Mindfulness of Breathing. See too Vsm VIII, 145-244.

141 MA: The phrase "experiencing the whole body" ( sabba -
kayapatisamvedt) means that the meditator becomes aware
of each in-and-out breath through the three phases of its
beginning, middle, and end.

142 The "bodily formation" {kayasankhara) is defined at
MN 44.13 as in-and-out breathing itself. Thus, as MA
explains, with the successful development of the practice,
the meditator's breathing becomes increasingly quiet,
tranquil, and peaceful.

143 MA: "Internally": contemplating the breathing in his
own body. "Externally": contemplating the breathing
occurring in the body of another. "Internally and exter-
nally": contemplating the breathing in his own body and
in the body of another alternately, with uninterrupted
attention. A similar explanation applies to the refrain that
follows each of the other sections, except that under the
contemplation of feeling, mind, and mind-objects, the
contemplation externally, apart from those possessing
telepathic powers, must be inferential.

144 MA: The "arising factors" ( samudayadhamma ) for the
body are the conditions on account of which the body


Notes to Sutta 10 1191


has arisen - namely, ignorance, craving, kamma, and
food - together with the concrete fact of the moment-by-
moment origination of material phenomena in the body.
In the case of mindfulness of breathing, an additional
arising factor mentioned by the commentaries is the
physiological apparatus of respiration. The "vanishing
factors" ( vayadhamma ) for the body are the cessation of
the causal conditions and the momentary dissolution of
material phenomena in the body.

145 MA: For the sake of a wider and wider and higher and
higher measure of knowledge and mindfulness.

146 The understanding of the bodily postures referred to in
this exercise is not our ordinary natural knowledge of
our bodily activity, but a close, constant, and careful
awareness of the body in every position, coupled with an
analytical examination intended to dispel the delusion of
a self as the agent of bodily movement.

147 Sampajahha, also translated as "clear comprehension"
(Soma, Nyanaponika), is analysed in the commentaries
into four types: full awareness of the purpose of one's
action; full awareness of the suitability of one's means; full
awareness of the domain, that is, not abandoning the sub-
ject of meditation during one's daily routine; and full
awareness of reality, the knowledge that behind one's
activities there is no abiding self. See The Way of Mindful-
ness, pp. 60-100; The Heart of Buddhist Meditation, pp. 46-55.

148 In later Pali works the brain is added to the above list to
form thirty- two parts. The details of this meditation prac-
tice are explained at Vsm VIII, 42-144.

149 These four elements are explained by Buddhist tradition
as the primary attributes of matter - solidity, cohesion,
heat, and distension. The detailed explanation is found at
Vsm XI, 27-117.

150 The phrase "as though" ( seyyathapi ) suggests that this
meditation, and those to follow, need not be based upon
an actual encounter with a corpse in the state of decay
described, but can be performed as an imaginative exer-
cise. "This same body" is, of course, the meditator's
own body.

151 Each of the four types of corpse mentioned here, and the


1192 The Majjhima Nikaya


three types below, may be taken as a separate and self-
sufficient subject of meditation; or the entire set may be
used as a progressive series for impressing on the mind
the idea of the body's transience and insubstantiality.
The progression continues in §§26-30.

152 Feeling ( vedana ) signifies the affective quality of experi-
ence, bodily and mental, either pleasant, painful, or nei-
ther, i.e., neutral feeling. Examples of the "worldly" and
"unworldly" forms of these feelings are given at
MN 137.9-15 under the rubric of the six kinds of joy,
grief, and equanimity based respectively on the house-
hold life and renunciation.

153 The arising and vanishing factors for feeling are the same
as those for the body (see n.144) except that food is
replaced by contact, since contact is the condition for
feeling (see MN 9.42).

154 Mind {citta) as an object of contemplation refers to the gen-
eral state and level of consciousness. Since consciousness
itself, in its own nature, is the bare knowing or cognizing
of an object, the quality of any state of mind is determined
by its associated mental factors, such as lust, hate, and
delusion or their opposites, as mentioned by the sutta.

155 The paired examples of citta given in this passage contrast
states of mind of wholesome and unwholesome, or devel-
oped and undeveloped character. An exception, however,
is the pair "contracted" and "distracted," which are both
unwholesome, the former due to sloth and torpor, the lat-
ter due to restlessness and remorse. MA explains "exalted
mind" and "unsurpassed mind" as the mind pertaining to
the level of the jhanas and immaterial meditative attain-
ments, and "unexalted mind" and "surpassed mind" as
the mind pertaining to the level of sense-sphere conscious-
ness. "Liberated mind" must be understood as a mind
temporarily and partly freed from defilements through
insight or the jhanas. Since the practice of satipatthana
pertains to the preliminary phase of the path aimed at
the supramundane paths of deliverance, this last catego-
ry should not be understood as a mind liberated through
attainment of the supramundane paths.

156 The arising and vanishing factors of mind are the same


Notes to Sutta 10 1193


as those for the body except that food is replaced by
mentality-materiality, since the latter is the condition for
consciousness (see DN 15.22/ii.63).

157 The word rendered here as "mind-objects" is the poly-
morphous dhamma. In this context dhamma can be under-
stood as comprising all phenomena classified by way of
the categories of the Dhamma, the Buddha's teaching of
actuality. This contemplation reaches its climax in the
penetration of the teaching at the heart of the Dhamma -
the Four Noble Truths.

158 The five hindrances ( pancanwarand ) are the main inner
impediments to the development of concentration and
insight. Sensual desire arises through attending unwisely
to a sensually attractive object and is abandoned by med-
itation on a foul object (as in §10 and §§14-30); ill will
arises through attending unwisely to a repugnant object
and is abandoned by developing loving-kindness; sloth
and torpor arise by submitting to boredom and laziness
and are abandoned by arousing energy; restlessness and
remorse arise through unwisely reflecting on disturbing
thoughts and are abandoned by wisely reflecting on tran-
quillity; doubt arises through unwisely reflecting on
dubious matters and is abandoned by study, investiga-
tion, and inquiry. The hindrances are fully eradicated
only by the supramundane paths. For a fuller treatment,
see The Way of Mindfulness, pp. 119-130; Nyanaponika
Thera, The Five Mental Hindrances-, and also below,
MN 27.18 and MN 39.13-14.

159 The five aggregates affected by clinging ( pahc'upadana -
kkhandha) are the five groups of factors comprising the
individual personality. The aggregates are discussed in
the Introduction, p. 26, and are analysed and explained
in terms of their origin and disappearance at MN 109.9.

160 The internal bases are, as shown, the six sense faculties;
the external bases, their respective objects. The fetter that
arises dependent upon the pairs may be understood by
way of the ten fetters explained in the Introduction,
pp. 42-43, or more simply as attraction (greed), aversion
(hatred), and the underlying delusion.

161 How the seven enlightenment factors unfold in progres-


1194 The Majjhima Nikaya


sive sequence is explained at MN 118.29—40. For a more
detailed discussion, see Piyadassi Thera, The Seven Fac-
tors of Enlightenment.

162 “Investigation of states" ( dhammavicaya ) means the scru-
tiny of the mental and physical phenomena presented to
the meditator's mind by mindfulness.

163 The commentaries explain in detail the conditions that
conduce to the maturation of the enlightenment factors.
See The Way of Mindfulness, pp. 134-149.

164 With this section, the contemplation of dhammd as mind-
objects culminates in the understanding of the Dhamma in
its core formulation as the Four Noble Truths. The longer
Mahasatipatthana Sutta of the Dlgha Nikaya gives extend-
ed definitions and elaborations of each of the truths.

165 Final knowledge, anna, is the arahant's knowledge of
final deliverance. Non-return (anagamita) is, of course, the
state of a non-returner, who is reborn in a higher world
where he attains final Nibbana without ever returning to
the human world.

SUTTA 11

166 The phrase "only here" means only in the Buddha's
Dispensation. The four recluses (s amana) referred to are
the four grades of noble disciples - the stream-enterer,
once-retumer, non-returner, and arahant. A "lion's roar"
(si hanada), according to MA, is a roar of supremacy and
fearlessness, a roar that cannot be confuted. In connec-
tion with the Buddha's proclamation, see also his discus-
sion with Subhadda in the Mahaparinibbdna Sutta
(DN 16:5.27/ii.l51-52).

167 MA: Even though the adherents of other sects all declare
arahantship - understood in a general way as spiritual
perfection - to be the goal, they point out other attain-
ments as the goal in accordance with their views. Thus
the brahmins declare the Brahma-world to be the goal,
the ascetics declare the gods of Streaming Radiance, the
wanderers the gods of Refulgent Glory, and the Ajivakas
the non-percipient state, which they imagine to be "infi-
nite mind."


Notes to Sutta 11 1195


168 "Favouring and opposing" ( anurodhapativirodha ) means
reacting with attraction through lust and with aversion
through hate.

169 Proliferation ( papanca ), according to MA, is here mental
activity governed by craving and views. For more on this
important term, see n.229.

170 The view of being ( bhavaditthi ) is etemalism, the belief in
an eternal self; the view of non-being ( vibhavaditthi ) is
annihilationism, the denial of any principle of continuity
as a basis for rebirth and kammic retribution. The adop-
tion of one view entailing opposition to the other ties up
with the earlier statement that the goal is for one who
does not favour and oppose.

171 As the origin (s amudaya) of these views, MA mentions
eight conditions: the five aggregates, ignorance, contact,
perception, thought, unwise attention, bad friends, and
the voice of another. Their disappearance ( atthangama ) is
the path of stream-entry, which eradicates all wrong
views. Their gratification ( assada ) may be understood as
the satisfaction of psychological need that they provide;
their danger ( adlnava ) is the continual bondage that they
entail; the escape ( nissarana ) from them is Nibbana.

172 MA glosses full understanding ( parinna ) here as over-
coming, transcending (samatikkama), with reference to the
commentarial notion of pahanaparinna, "full understand-
ing as abandonment." See n.7.

173 This passage clearly states that the critical factor differen-
tiating the Buddha's teaching from all other religious and
philosophical creeds is its "full understanding of clinging
to a doctrine of self." This means, in effect, that the
Buddha alone is able to show how to overcome all views
of self by developing penetration of the truth of non-self.
Since the other spiritual teachers lack this understanding
of non-self, their claims to fully understand the three
other kinds of clinging are also suspect.

174 MA: That is, the Buddha teaches how clinging to sense
pleasures (understood as comprising all forms of greed,
MT) is abandoned by the path of arahantship, the other
three clingings by the path of stream-entry.

175 This passage is stated to show how clinging is to be aban-




1196 The Majjhima Nikaya


doned. Clinging is traced back to its root-cause in igno-
rance, and then the destruction of ignorance is shown to
be the means to eradicate clinging.

176 The Pali idiom, n'eva kdmupadanam upadiyati, would have to
be rendered literally as "he does not cling to the clinging to
sense pleasures," which may obscure the sense rather than
convey it. Upadana in Pali is the object of its own verb
form, while "clinging" in English is not. At one stage in
his translation Nm tried to circumvent this problem by
borrowing the word upadana' s other meaning of "fuel"
and translating: "he no longer clings to sensual desires
[as fuel for] clinging." This, however, also borders on
obscurity, and I have therefore attempted to cut through
the difficulty by translating directly in accordance with
the sense rather than in conformity with the literal idiom.

SUTTA 12

177 The Sunakkhatta Sutta (MN 105) had been expounded to
him by the Buddha, apparently before he joined the
Sangha; the account of his defection is given in the Patika
Sutta (DN 24). He became dissatisfied and left the Order
because the Buddha would not perform any miracles for
him or explain to him the beginning of things.

178 Superhuman states ( uttari manussadhamma) are states,
virtues, or attainments higher than the ordinary human
virtues comprised in the ten wholesome courses of action
(see MN 9.6); they include the jhanas, the kinds of direct
knowledge, and the paths and fruits. "Distinction in
knowledge and vision worthy of the noble ones" ( alam -
ariyahamdassanavisesa), a frequently occurring expression
in the suttas, signifies all higher degrees of meditative
knowledge characteristic of the noble individual. Here,
according to MA, it means specifically the supramun-
dane path, which Sunakkhatta is denying of the Buddha.

179 The gist of his criticism is that the Buddha teaches a doc-
trine that he has merely worked out in thought rather
than one he has realised through transcendental wisdom.
Apparently he believes that being led to the complete
destruction of suffering is, as a goal, inferior to the acqui-




Notes to Sutta 12 1197


sition of miraculous powers.

180 All the sections to follow are set forth as a rebuttal of
Sunakkhatta's criticism of the Buddha. §§6-8 cover the
first three of the six direct knowledges ( abhinna ), the last
three appearing as the last of the ten powers of the
Tathagata. The latter, according to MA, are to be under-
stood as powers of knowledge [Mnabala) that are
attained by all Buddhas as the fruit of their accumulation
of merit. The Vibhanga (§§809-31/440-51) of the Abhi-
dhamma Pitaka provides an elaborate analysis of them.

181 On the Buddha's sounding of his lion's roar, see
SN 22:78/iii.84— 86. The Wheel of Brahma is the supreme,
best, most excellent wheel, the Wheel of the Dhamma
(i dhammacakka ) in its twofold meaning: the knowledge
penetrating the truth and the knowledge of how to
expound the teaching (MA).

182 Vbh §809 explicates this knowledge by quoting at length
MN 115.12-17. MA, however, explains it differently as
the knowledge of the correlations between causes and
their results.

183 This knowledge can be exemplified by the Buddha's
analysis of kamma in MN 57, MN 135 and MN 136.

184 This knowledge will be elucidated in §§35-42 below.

185 The Tathagata's understanding of the many elements
constituting the world will be found in MN 115.4-9.

186 Vbh §813 explains that the Tathagata understands that
beings are of inferior inclinations and superior inclina-
tions, and that they gravitate towards those who share
their own inclinations.

187 Vbh §§814-27 gives a detailed analysis. MA states the
meaning more concisely as the Tathagata's knowledge’ of
the superiority and inferiority of beings' faculties of faith,
energy, mindfulness, concentration, and wisdom.

188 Vbh §828: The “defilement" ( sankilesa ) is a state causing
deterioration, "cleansing" ( vodana ) a state causing
excellence, "emergence" ( vutthana ) is both cleansing and
the rising out of an attainment. The eight liberations
( vimokkha ) are enumerated in MN 77.22 and MN 137.26;
the nine attainments ( samapatti ) are the four jhanas, four
immaterial attainments, and the cessation of perception



1198 The Majjhima Nikaya


and feeling as in MN 25.12-20.

189 The idiom yathabhatam nikkhitto evath niraye is knotty;
the rendering here follows the commentary: "He will b e
put in hell as if carried off and put there by the wardens
of hell."

190 In later Buddhist tradition the asuras, titans or "anti-gods,"
are added as a separate realm to make six destinations.

191 Ekanta: may also mean "exclusively" or "incessantly."

192 MA: Even though the description is the same as that of
the bliss of the heavenly world, the meaning is different.
For the bliss of the heavenly world is not really extremely
pleasant because the fevers of lust, etc., are still present
there. But the bliss of Nibbana is extremely pleasant in
every way through the subsiding of all fevers.

193 At this juncture, MA informs us, the Buddha related
this account of his past ascetic practices because Sunak-
khatta was a great admirer of extreme asceticism (as the
Patika Sutta shows) and the Buddha wanted to make it
known that there was no one who could equal him in the
practice of austerities. The passages to follow should be
collated with MN 4.20 and MN 36.20-30 for a fuller pic-
ture of the Bodhisatta's experiment with the extreme of
self-mortification.

194 The "eight-days interval of frost" refers to a regular cold
spell that occurs in northern India in late December or
early January. *

195 That is, they hold the view that beings are purified by
reducing their intake of food.

196 Rebirth into the Pure Abodes (suddhavasa) is possible
only for non-returners.

197 The Pali for the four terms is: sati, gati, dhiti, pahhdveyyat-
tiya. MA explains sati as the ability to grasp in mind a
hundred or a thousand phrases as they are being spoken;
gati as the ability to bind them and retain them in the
mind; dhiti as the ability to recite back what has been
grasped and retained; and pahhaveyyattiya as the ability
to discern the meaning and logic of those phrases.

198 Ven. Nagasamala had been a personal attendant of the
Buddha during the first twenty years of his ministry.

199 Lomahamsanapariydya. The sutta is referred to by that


Notes to Suttas 12 and 13 1199


name at Miln 398 and in the commentary to the Digha
Nikaya.

SUTTA 13

200 MA: "Full understanding" (parihha) here means overcom-
ing ( samatikkama ) or abandoning (pahdna ). The wanderers
of other sects identify the full understanding of sensual
pleasures with the first jhana, the full understanding of
material form with the immaterial planes of being, and
the full understanding of feelings with the impercipient
plane of being. The Buddha, in contrast, describes the full
understanding of sensual pleasures as the path of the
non-returner, and the full understanding of both material
form and feelings as the path of arahantship.

201 MA gives a graphic description of each of these forms of
torture.

202 It should be noted that while the previous dangers in
sensual pleasures were called "a mass of suffering visible
here and now" ( sanditthiko dukkhakkhandho), this one is
called "a mass of suffering in the life to come" (samparayiko
dukkhakkhandho).

203 MA says that Nibbana is the removal and abandonment
of desire and lust for sensual pleasures, for in depen-
dence on Nibbana, desire and lust are removed and
abandoned. It might also be taken to include the path of
the non-returner, which accomplishes the abandoning of
desire and lust for sensual pleasures.

204 To expose the danger in feelings, the Buddha chooses the
most refined and exalted type of mundane pleasure, the
bliss and peacefulness of the jhanas, and shows that even
those states are impermanent and therefore unsatisfactory.

SUTTA 14

205 Mahanama the Sakyan was a cousin of the Buddha and
the brother of Vens. Anuruddha and Ananda. He chose
to remain a householder and let Anuruddha become a
monk. The story is told in Nanamoli, The Life of the
Buddha, pp. 80-81.



1200 The Majjhima Nikaya


206 According to MA, Mahanama had long ago attained the
fruit of the once-returner, which only weakens greed,
hate, and delusion but does not eradicate them. MA says
that he had the mistaken notion that greed, hate, and
delusion are eradicated by the path of the once-retumer.
Thus, when he saw that they still arose in his mind, he
realised that they were not abandoned and inquired from
the Buddha the cause for their arising. Noble disciples
can be mistaken about which defilements are abandoned
by which path.

207 From the ensuing discussion on the danger in sensual
pleasures, it seems that the "state" (dhamma) unabandoned
by Mahanama was sensual desire, which kept him tied to
the home life and the enjoyment of sensual pleasures.

208 The "rapture and pleasure that are apart from sensual
pleasures" are the rapture and pleasure pertaining to the
first and second jhanas; the states "more peaceful than
that" are the higher jhanas. From this passage it seems
that a disciple may attain even to the second path and
fruit without possessing mundane jhana.

209 The Niganthas or Jains, followers of the teacher Nigantha
Nataputta (also known as Mahavlra), stressed the prac-
tice of austerities to wear off the accumulations of past
evil kamma. The purpose of this passage, according to
MA, is to show the escape, which was not shown earlier
along with the gratification and the danger in sensual
pleasures. The Buddha brings in the Jain practice of
asceticism to demonstrate that his own teaching is a
"Middle Way" free from the two extremes of sensual
indulgence and self-mortification.

210 The Jains held the view that whatever a person experi-
ences is caused by past kamma. If that were so, the
Buddha argues, the severe pains to which they subjected
themselves as part of their ascetic discipline would have
to be rooted in grave actions of their previous lives.

211 MA: This refers to his own experience of the pleasure of
fruition attainment, i.e., the attainment of the fruit of ara-
hantship ( arahattaphalasamdpatti ).


Notes to Suttas 14-16 1201


SUITA 15

212 Vadantu, meaning literally "let them speak to me," has
the implied sense: "Let them speak to me by way of
instruction and exhortation" (MA).

213 See MN 5.10-29.

214 See MN 8.44 and n.109.

215 It is from this passage that the sutta acquires its name.

216 MA: The ancients called this sutta the "Bhikkhupati-
mokkha." A bhikkhu should review himself three times
daily in the way described in the sutta. If he cannot do so
three times, then he should do so twice, or, at the mini-
mum, once.

sutta 16

217 MA explains cetokhila, translated "wilderness in the
heart," as rigidity, rubbish, or a stump in the mind. It
explains cetaso vinibandha as something that binds the
mind, clenching it like a fist; hence "shackle in the heart."
The former, as will be seen, consists of four cases of
doubt, one of hate; the latter of five varieties of greed.

218 MA explains "Dhamma" here as the scriptural teaching
and penetration to the paths, fruits, and Nibbana. The
Dhamma as practice is mentioned separately just below
as the training ( sikkha ) - that is, the threefold training in
virtue, concentration, and wisdom.

219 "Body" here is his own body, while "form" just below is
outer forms, the bodies of others.

220 The four bases for spiritual power ( iddhipada ) are included
among the thirty-seven requisites of enlightenment; they
are the special foundation for the five mundane kinds of
direct knowledge ( abhiMa ). According to MA, enthusi-
asm ( ussolhi ) is energy, which is to be applied every-
where.

221 The fifteen factors are the abandoning of the five wilder-
nesses of the heart, the abandoning of the five shackles,
and the five just mentioned. "Supreme security from
bondage" (anuttara yogakkhema) is arahantship, as at
MN 1.27.

222 This simile appears again at MN 53.19-22 in connection


1202 The Majjhima Nikaya


with the disciple's breaking out to the three types of true
knowledge ( tevijja ).

sutta 17

223 The pattern on which §§3-6 are constructed may be stated
simply as follows:

no progress and requisites are scarce = depart;
no progress and requisites are plentiful = depart;
progress and requisites are scarce = stay;
progress and requisites are plentiful = stay.

224 The same pattern is applied in §§7-22 to village, town,
city, and country.

225 PTS ed., in reading here anapuccha, "without taking
leave," seems to be mistaken. BBS and SBJ eds. read
apuccha, "after taking leave," which seems more fitting.
As the person on whom the bhikkhu relied - presumably
a lay supporter - provided the requisites in adequate
measure, courtesy requires that the bhikkhu take leave of
him before departing.

SUTTA 18

226 Dandapani, whose name means "stick-in-hand," was so
called because he used to walk around ostentatiously
with a golden walking stick, even though he was still
young and healthy. According to MA, he sided with
Devadatta, the Buddha's arch foe, when the latter
attempted to create a schism in the Buddha's following.
His manner of asking the question is arrogant and delib-
erately provocative.

227 The first part of the Buddha's reply directly counters
Dandapani's aggressive attitude. MA quotes in this con-
nection SN 22:94/iii. 138: "Bhikkhus, I do not dispute
with the world, it is the world that disputes with me. A
speaker of Dhamma does not dispute with anyone in the
world." The second part may be taken to mean that, for
the arahant (spoken of here as "that brahmin" with refer-
ence to the Buddha himself), perceptions no longer
awaken the dormant underlying tendencies to defile-


Notes to Sutta 18 1203


ments, to be enumerated in §8.

228 This response seems to be an expression of frustration
and bewilderment.

229 The interpretation of this cryptic passage hinges on the
word papanca and the compound papahca-sanna-sankha.
Nm had translated the former as "diversification" and
the latter as "calculations about perceptions of diversifi-
cation." It seems, however, that the primary problem to
which the term papanca points is not "diversification,"
which may be quite in place when the sensory field itself
displays diversity, but the propensity of the worldling's
imagination to erupt in an effusion of mental commen-
tary that obscures the bare data of cognition. In a pene-
trative study, Concept and Reality in Early Buddhism,
Bhikkhu Nanananda explains papanca as "conceptual
proliferation," and I follow him in substituting "prolifer-
ation" for Nm's "diversification." The commentaries
identify the springs of this proliferation as the three fac-
tors - craving, conceit, and views - on account of which
the mind "embellishes" experience by interpreting it in
terms of "mine," "I" and "my self." Papanca is thus close-
ly akin to the mahhana, "conceiving," of MN 1 - see n.6.

The compound papahca-sahha-sankha is more problem-
atic. Ven. Nanananda interprets it to mean "concepts
characterised by the mind's prolific tendency," but this
explanation still leaves the word sahha out of account.
MA glosses sankha by kotthasa, "portion," and says that
sahha is either perception associated with papanca or
papanca itself. I go along with Ven. Nanananda in taking
sankha to mean concept or notion (Nm's "calculation" is
too literal) rather than portion. My decision to treat
sahhd-sankhd as a dvanda compound, "perceptions and
notions," may be questioned, but as the expression
papahca-sahhd-sankhd occurs but rarely in the Canon and
is never verbally analysed, no rendering is utterly
beyond doubt. On alternative interpretations of its com-
ponents, the expression might have been rendered
"notions [arisen from] the proliferation of perceptions"
or "perceptual notions [arisen from] proliferation."

The sequel will make it clear that the process of cogni-


1204 The Majjhima Nikaya


tion is itself "the source through which perceptions and
notions tinged by mental proliferation beset a man." if
nothing in the process of cognition is found to delight in,
to welcome, or to hold to, the underlying tendencies of
the defilements will come to an end.

230 Ven. Maha Kaccana was declared by the Buddha to be
the most eminent disciple in expounding the detailed
meaning of a brief saying. MN 133 and MN 138 were also
spoken by him under similar circumstances.

231 Cakkhubhuto nanabhuto dhammabhnto brahmabhuto. MA:
He is vision in the sense that he is the leader in vision; he
is knowledge in the sense that he makes things known;
he is the Dhamma in the sense that he consists of the
Dhamma that he utters verbally after considering it in his
heart; he is Brahma, the holy one, in the sense of the best.

232 This passage shows how papahca, emerging from the
process of cognition, gives rise tp perceptions and
notions that overwhelm and victimise their hapless crea-
tor. Ms contains a note by Nm: "The meeting of eye,
form, and eye-consciousness is called contact. Contact,
according to dependent origination, is the principal con-
dition of feeling. Feeling and perception are inseparable
(MN 43.9). What is perceived as 'this' is thought about in
its differences and is thus diversified from 'that' and
from 'me.' This diversification - involving craving for
form, wrong view about permanence of form, etc., and
the conceit 'I am' - leads to preoccupation with calculat-
ing the desirability of past and present forms with a
view to obtaining desirable forms in the future."
Perhaps the key to the interpretation of this passage is
Ven. Maha Kaccana 's explanation of the Bhaddekaratta
verses in MN 133. There too delight in the elements of
cognition plays a prominent role in causing bondage,
and the elaboration of the verses in terms of the three
periods of time links up with the reference to the three
times in this sutta.

233 The Pali idiom phassapannattim panmpessati, in which the
verb takes an object derived from itself, is difficult. Nm
originally rendered "that one will describe a description
of contact." "To point out a manifestation" is less literal.


Notes to Suttas 18-20 1205


but it should do justice to the meaning without jeopardis-
ing intelligibility. MA says that this passage is intended
to show the entire round of existence ( vatta ) by way of
the twelve sense bases; §18 shows the cessation of the
round ( vivatta ) by the negation of the twelve sense bases.

234 A large sweet cake or a ball made from flour, ghee,
molasses, honey, sugar, etc. See also AN 5:194/iii.237.

sutta 19

235 The Bodhisatta's twofold division of thought occurred
during his six-year struggle for enlightenment.

236 Thoughts of non-ill will and thoughts of non-cruelty
may also be explained positively as thoughts of loving-
kindness ( metta ) and thoughts of compassion ( karuna ).

237 MA: Excessive thinking and pondering leads to agitation.
To tame and soften the mind, the Bodhisatta would enter
a meditative attainment, then he would emerge from it
and develop insight.

SUTTA 20

238 This sutta together with its commentary is available in a
translation by Soma Thera, The Removal of Distracting
Thoughts.

239 MA: The higher mind ( adhicitta ) is the mind of the eight
meditative attainments used as a basis for insight; it is
called "higher mind" because it is higher than the ordi-
nary (wholesome) mind of the ten wholesome courses of
action. The five "signs" ( nimitta ) may be understood as
practical methods of removing the distracting thoughts.
They should be resorted to only when the distractions
become persistent or obtrusive; at other times the medita-
tor should remain with his primary subject of meditation.

240 MA: When thoughts of sensual desire arise directed
towards living beings, the "other sign" is the meditation
on foulness (see MN 10.10); when the thoughts are direct-
ed to inanimate things, the "other sign" is attention to
impermanence. When thoughts of hate arise directed
towards living beings, the "other sign" is the meditation


1206 The Majjhima Nikaya


on loving-kindness; when they are directed to inanimate
things, the "other sign" is attention to the elements (see
MN 10.12). The remedy for thoughts connected with
delusion is living under a teacher, studying the Dhamma,
inquiring into its meaning, listening to the Dhamma, and
inquiring into causes.

241 This method can be illustrated by the reflections of the
Bodhisatta in MN 19.3-5. Calling to mind the unworthi-
ness of the evil thoughts produces a sense of shame ( hiri );
calling to mind their dangerous consequences produces
fear of wrongdoing ( ottappa ).

242 Vitakka-sankhara-santhanam. MA understands sankhara
here as condition, cause, or root, and takes the com-
pound to mean "stopping the cause of the thought." This
is accomplished by inquiring, when an unwholesome
thought has arisen: "What is its cause? What is the cause
of its cause?" etc. Such an inquiry, according to MA,
brings about a slackening, and eventually the cessation,
of the flow of unwholesome thought.

243 MA: He should crush the unwholesome state of mind
with a wholesome state of mind.

244 This shows the attainment of arahantship. See n.50.


SUTTA 21

245 At SN 12:12/ii.l3 Moliya Phagguna puts a series of ques-
tions to the Buddha, which the Buddha rejects as wrong-
ly formulated. Later it is reported that he reverted to lay
life (SN 12:32/ ii.50).

246 According to MA, the Buddha said this because
Phagguna still did not wish to comply with his advice but
continued to resist him, and this induced the Buddha to
speak praise of the compliant bhikkhus during an earlier
part of his ministry. For the passage on eating at a single
session, see MN 65.2 and MN 70.2.

247 Tadarammanam, lit. "with him as the object." MA: First
one develops loving-kindness towards the person who
addresses one with one or another of the five courses of


Notes to Suttas 21 and 22 1207


speech, then one directs that mind of loving-kindness
towards all beings, making the entire world the object.


SUTTA 22

248 This sutta with a fine introduction and detailed notes is
available in a translation by Nyanaponika Thera, The
Discourse on the Snake Simile.

249 In making this assertion he directly contradicts the third
of the four intrepidities of the Tathagata - see MN 12.25.
According to MA, while reflecting in seclusion he came
to the conclusion that there would be no harm if
bhikkhus were to engage in sexual relations with women
and he maintained that this should not be prohibited by
the monastic rules. Though his statement does not
expressly mention the sexual issue, the similes about sen-
sual pleasures brought forth by the bhikkhus lend cre-
dence to the commentary.

250 The first seven similes for sense pleasures are expanded
upon at MN 54.15-21.

251 This first part of the Arittha episode occurs twice in the
Vinaya Pitaka. At Vin ii.25 it leads to the Sangha
announcing an act of suspension ( ukkhepaniyakamma )
against Arittha for refusing to give up his wrong view.
At Vin iv.133-34 his refusal to give up his wrong view
after repeated admonitions is defined as a monastic
offence of the Pacittiya class.

252 Though the Pali uses the one word kania in all four cases,
from the context the first phrase must be understood to
refer to objective sensual pleasures, i.e., sensually enjoy-
able objects, the other phrases to refer to subjective
defilements connected with sensuality, i.e., sensual
desire. MA glosses "that one can engage in sensual plea-
sures" with "that one can indulge in sexual intercourse."
MT says that other physical acts expressive of sexual
desire such as hugging and stroking should be included.


1208 The Majjhima Nikaya


253 MA explains that this passage is stated in order to show
the fault in wrongly motivated acquisition of intellectual
knowledge of the Dhamma - apparently the pitfall into
which Arittha fell. The "good ( attha ) for the sake of
which they learned the Dhamma" is the paths and fruits.

254 This famous "simile of the raft" continues the same argu-
ment against misuse of learning introduced by the simile
of the snake. One who is preoccupied with using the
Dhamma to stir up controversy and win debates carries
the Dhamma around on his head instead of using it to
cross the flood.

255 Dhamma pi vo pahatabbn pageva adhamma. MA identifies the
good states with serenity and insight (samatha-vipassanR),
and paraphrases the meaning: "I teach, bhikkhus, even
the abandoning of desire and attachment to such peace-
ful and sublime states as serenity and insight, how much
more so to that low, vulgar, contemptible, coarse, and
impure thing that this foolish Arittha sees as harmless
when he says that there is no obstruction in desire and
lust for the five cords of sensual pleasure." The commen-
tator cites MN 66.26-33 as an example of the Buddha
teaching the abandonment of attachment to serenity,
MN 38.14 as an example of his teaching the abandon-
ment of attachment to insight. Note that it is in each case
the attachment to the good states that -should be aban-
doned, not the g i ood states themselves. The Buddha's
injunction is not an invitation to moral nihilism or a pro-
posal that the enlightened person has gone beyond good
and evil. In this connection see MN 76.51.

256 This section evidently has the purpose of forestalling
another type of misconception and misrepresentation of
the Dhamma, i.e., the introduction of a view of self into
the teaching. According to MA, standpoints for views
( ditthitthana ) are wrong views themselves as grounds for
other more elaborate wrong views; the objects of views,
i.e., the five aggregates; and the conditions for views, i.e.,
such factors as ignorance, perverted perception, and false
thoughts, etc.

257 MA states that the notion "this is mine" is induced by
craving, the notion "this I am" by conceit, and the notion


Notes to Sutta 22 1209


"this is my self" by wrong views. These three - craving,
conceit, and views - are called the three obsessions
igaha). They are also the mainsprings behind conceiving
(MN 1) and mental proliferation (MN 18).

258 This series of terms shows the aggregate of consciousness
indirectly, by way of its object. The "seen" points to eye-
consciousness, the "heard" to ear-consciousness, the
"sensed" to the other three kinds of sense consciousness,
and the remaining terms to mind-consciousness.

259 This is a full-fledged etemalist view arisen on the basis of
one of the earlier, more rudimentary types of personality
view; here it becomes itself an object of craving, conceit,
and the false view of self. Ven. Nyanaponika contends
that this view expresses the identity of the self with the
universe, though this interpretation is purely hypotheti-
cal as the Pali is ambiguous and could just as well be
pointing to a fundamental dualism of self and world
along the lines of Sartkhya philosophy with its distinction
between changeable Nature ( prakji ) and changeless
Spirit ( puru'a )

260 Asati na paritassati. The noun form paritassana, according
to MA, has the twofold connotation of fear and craving,
thus "agitation" was chosen as comprehending both.
Agitation about what is non-existent externally (§18)
refers to the worldling's despair over the loss or non-
acquisition of possessions; agitation about what is non-
existent internally (§20) to the etemalist's despair when
he misinterprets the Buddha's teaching on Nibbana as a
doctrine of annihilation.

261 Pariggaham pariganheyyatha, lit. "you may possess that
possession." This links up with §18 on agitation about
external possessions.

262 Attavadupadanam upadiyetha, lit. "you may cling to that
clinging to a doctrine of self." On the problem this idiom
involves for translation, see n.l 76. This passage links up
with §20 on agitation arising from a view of self.

263 The support of views ( ditthinissaya ), according to MA, is
the sixty-two views mentioned in the Brahmajala Sutta
(DN 1), which emerge from personality view or "doc-
trine of a self." It might also include the pernicious view



1210 The Majjhima Nikaya


adopted by Arittha at the beginning of the sutta.

264 The notion "what belongs to self" or "self's property"
(attaniya) is ascribed to whichever among the five aggre-
gates are not identified as self, as well as to all the indi-
vidual's external possessions. This passage shows the
mutual dependence, and thus the equal untenability, of
the twin notions "I" and "mine."

265 According to the commentaries, disenchantment ( nibbida ,
also rendered "revulsion" or "disgust") signifies the cul-
minating stages of insight, dispassion ( viraga ) the attain-
ment of the supramundane path, and liberation ( vimutti )
the fruit. The arahant's reviewing knowledge ( pacca -
vekkhanahana) is shown by the phrase "there comes the
knowledge" and "he understands: 'Birth is destroyed...'."

266 "Thus gone" is, in Pali, tathagata, the usual epithet of the
Buddha, but here applied more broadly to the arahant.
MA interprets this passage in two alternative ways thus:
(1) The arahant even while alive is here and now untrace-
able as a being or individual (in the sense of an abiding
self) because in the ultimate sense there is no being (as
self). (2) The arahant is untraceable here and now
because it is impossible for the gods, etc., to find the sup-
port for his insight-mind, path-mind, or fruition-mind
{vipassanacitta, maggacitta, phalacitta ); that is, the object
being Nibbana, his mind cannot.be known by the
worldling. »

267 This refers back to §20, where the eternalist misunder-
stands the Buddha's teaching on Nibbana, the cessation
of being, to involve the annihilation of an existing being
considered as self.

268 The import of this statement is deeper than appears on
the surface. In the context of the false accusations of §37,
the Buddha is stating that he teaches that a living being
is not a self but a mere conglomeration of factors, mater-
ial and mental events, linked together in a process that is
inherently dukkha, and that Nibbana, the cessation of suf-
fering, is not the annihilation of a being but the termina-
tion of that same unsatisfactory process. This statement
should be read in conjunction with SN 12:15/ii.l7,
where the Buddha says that one with right view, who


Notes to Sutta 22 1211


has discarded all doctrines of a self, sees that whatever
arises is only dukkha arising, and whatever ceases is only
dukkha ceasing.

269 “What had earlier come to be fully understood" ( pubbe
parinnatam) are the five aggregates. Since it is only these
to which honour and abuse are shown, not an "I" or self,
there is no reason for elation or dejection.

270 MA points out that it is the attachment to the five aggre-
gates that should be abandoned; the aggregates them-
selves cannot be tom apart or pulled out.

271 MA: " Chinna-pilotika: pilotika is a tom and worn-out rag
stitched and knotted here and there; there is nothing (in
the Dhamma) like this - torn, worn-out, stitched and
knotted by way of hypocrisy and other deceptions."

272 That is, as the arahants have achieved deliverance from
the entire round of existence, it is impossible to point to
any plane within the round where they might be reborn.

273 These are two classes of individuals standing on the path
of stream-entry. "Dhamma-followers" ( dhammdnusdrin )
are disciples in whom the faculty of wisdom ( pannindriya )
is predominant and who develop the noble path with
wisdom in the lead; when they attain the fruit they are
called "attained-to-view" ( ditthipatta ). "Faith-followers"
(; saddhanusarin ) are disciples in whom the faculty of faith
(saddhindriya) is predominant and who develop the noble
path with faith in the lead; when they attain the fruit they
are called "liberated-by-faith" ( saddhavimutta ). See
MN 70.20, 21; also Pug 1:35-36/15 and Vsm XXI, 75.

274 MA says that this refers to persons devoted to the prac-
tice of insight meditation who have not reached any
supramundane attainment. Note that they are headed
only for heaven, not for enlightenment, though if their
practice matures they can attain the path of stream-entry
and thus gain assurance of enlightenment. The expres-
sion saddhamattam pemamattam might be rendered "sim-
ply faith, simply love" or "mere faith, mere love" (as it
sometimes is), but this could not explain the guarantee of
rebirth in heaven. It therefore seems obligatory to take
the suffix matta here as implying a requisite amount of
faith and love, not simple possession of these qualities.


1212 The Majjhima Nikaya





suit a 23

275 Ven. Kumara Kassapa was an adopted son of King
Pasenadi of Kosala, bom of a woman who, not knowing
she was pregnant, had gone forth as a bhikkhunl after
having conceived him. At the time this sutta was deliv-
ered he was still a sekha-, he attained arahantship using
this sutta as his subject of meditation.

276 According to MA, this deity was a non-returner living in
the Pure Abodes. He and Kumara Kassapa had been
members of a group of five fellow monks who, in the
Dispensation of the previous Buddha Kassapa, had prac-
tised meditation together on a mountain-top. It was this
same deity who spurred Bahiya Daruciriya, another for-
mer member of the group, to visit the Buddha (see
Ud 1:10/7).

277 The meaning of the deities' imagery will be explained
later on in the sutta itself.

278 Kummasa : The Vinaya and commentaries explain it as
something made of yava, barley. Nm had translated the
word as bread, but from MN 82.18 it is clear that kum-
masa is viscous and spoils overnight. PED defines it as
junket; Homer translates as "sour milk."

279 MA: Just as a bar across the entrance to a city prevents
people from entering it, so ignorance prevents people
from attaining Nibbana.

280 Dvedhapatha might also have been rendered "a forked
path," an obvious symbol for doubt.

281 MA states that the four feet and head of a tortoise are
similar to the five aggregates.

282 MA: the axe and block ( asisuna , at MN 22.3 rendered
"slaughterhouse") are used for chopping meat. Similarly,
beings desiring sensual enjoyments are chopped up by
the axe of sensual desires upon the block of sense objects.

283 The symbolism is explicated at MN 54.16.

284 This is an arahant. For the symbolism, see n.75.


sutta 24

285 The parenthetical specification is supplied from MA. The
Buddha's native land is Kapilavatthu, at the foot of the




Notes to Suita 24 1213


Himalayas.

286 The last five items form a set called the five aggregates of
Dhamma ( dhammakkhandha ). "Deliverance" is identified
with the noble fruits, "the knowledge and vision of deliv-
erance" with reviewing knowledge.

287 Ven. Punna Mantaniputta belonged to a brahmin family
and was ordained by Ven. Anna Kondanna at Kapila-
vatthu, where he continued to reside until he decided to
visit the Buddha at Savatthi. He was later declared by the
Buddha the most eminent bhikkhu among the preachers
of the Dhamma.

288 Although these seven purifications ( satta visuddhi) are
mentioned elsewhere in the Pali Canon (at DN iii.288,
with two added: purification by wisdom and purification
by deliverance), it is curious that they are not analysed as
a set anywhere in the Nikayas; and this becomes even
more puzzling when both these great disciples seem to
recognise them as a fixed group of doctrinal categories.
The sevenfold scheme forms, however, the scaffolding
for the entire Visuddhimagga, which defines the different
stages by means of the fully developed commentarial tra-
ditions on concentration and insight meditation.

In brief, "purification of virtue" ( silavisuddhi ) is the
unbroken adherence to the moral precepts one has
undertaken, explained by Vsm with reference to the
moral training of a bhikkhu as the "fourfold purification
of virtue." "Purification of mind" ( cittavisuddhi ) is the
overcoming of the five hindrances through the attain-
ment of access concentration and the jhanas. "Purifi-
cation of view" ( ditthivisuddhi ) is the understanding that
defines the nature of the five aggregates constituting -a
living being. "Purification by overcoming doubt"
(i kankhavitaranavisuddhi ) is the understanding of condi-
tionality. "Purification by knowledge and vision of what
is the path and what is not the path" (maggamagganana-
dassanavisuddhi) is the correct discrimination between the
false path of the ecstatic, exhilarating experiences and the
true path of insight into impermanence, suffering, and
not self. "Purification by knowledge and vision of the
way" ( patipadananadassanavisuddhi ) comprises the ascend-
ing series of insight knowledges up to the supramundane


1214 The Majjhima Nikaya


paths. And "purification by knowledge and vision"
(nanadassanavisuddhi) is the supramundane paths.

289 MA glosses anupadanaparinibbana as appaccayaparinibbana,
"final Nibbana that has no condition," explaining that
upaddna has two meanings: grasping (gahana), as in the
usual passage on the four types of clinging; and condi-
tion ( paccaya ), as illustrated by this passage. The com-
mentators explain "final Nibbana without clinging"
either as the fruit of arahantship, because it cannot be
grasped by any of the four types of clinging; or as
Nibbana the unconditioned, because it has not arisen
through any condition.

290 MA explains that the first six stages are "accompanied
by clinging" in the sense both of being conditioned and
of existing in one who still has grasping; the seventh
stage, being supramundane, only in the sense of being
conditioned.

291 MA says that Sariputta asked this only as a way of greet-
ing Punna Mantaniputta since he already knew his name.
Punna, however, had never seen Sariputta before and so
must have been genuinely surprised to meet the great
disciple.

292 Satthukappa. MA says that this is the highest praise that
can be spoken of a disciple.

t

SUTTA 25

293 Cetovimutti : MA explains that they simply abandoned
their resolution to live in the wilds, though it could well
be that these ascetics had attained - and lost - the eight
meditative attainments that are usually implied by the
term cetovimutti.

294 These are the ten speculative views debated by the ascetic
philosophers of the Buddha's age. All were rejected by
the Buddha as being unconnected with the fundamentals
of the holy life and unconducive to liberation from suffer-
ing. See MN 63, MN 72.

295 The eight meditative attainments here must be under-
stood, as MA explains, as bases for insight. When a
bhikkhu has entered such a jhana, Mara cannot see how


Notes to Suttas 25 and 26 1215


his mind is proceeding. This immunity from Mara's
influence, however, is as yet only temporary.

296 This last bhikkhu, by destroying the taints, has become
not only temporarily invisible to Mara but permanently
inaccessible to him. On the cessation of perception and
feeling, see Introduction, p. 41.

SUITA 26

297 This title follows the PTS and SBJ eds. of MN. The BBS
ed. of MN, and both the PTS and BBS eds. of MA, refer to
this discourse as the Pasarasi Sutta, The Heap of Snares,
with reference to the simile in §§32-33.

298 MA points out that the second jhana and one's basic
meditation subject are both called "noble silence" ( ariyo
tunhibhavo). Those who cannot attain the second jhana
are advised to maintain noble silence by attending to
their basic meditation subject.

299 Upadhi: The root meaning is foundation, basis, ground
(PED). In the commentaries various kinds of upadhi are
enumerated, among them the five aggregates, objects of
sensual pleasure, defilements, and kamma. Nm renders
the term consistently throughout as "essentials of exis-
tence," which often obscures its clear contextual mean-
ing. I have tried to capture the several connotations of the
word by rendering it "objects of attachment" where its
objective meaning is prominent (as it is here) and as
"attachment" where its subjective meaning is prominent.
At MN 26.19 Nibbana is called "the relinquishing of all
attachments" ( sabb'upadhipatinissagga ), with both mean-
ings intended.

300 Gold and silver are excluded from the things subject to
sickness, death, and sorrow, but they are subject to
defilement, according to MA, because they can be
alloyed with metals of lesser worth.

301 MA: He taught him the seven attainments (of serenity
meditation) ending in the base of nothingness, the third
of the four immaterial attainments. Though these attain-
ments are spiritually exalted, they are still mundane and
not in themselves directly conducive to Nibbana.


1216 The Majjhima Nikaya


302 That is, it leads to rebirth in the plane of existence called
the base of nothingness, the objective counterpart of the
seventh meditative attainment. Here the lifespan is sup-
posed to be 60,000 aeons, but when that has elapsed one
must pass away and return to a lower world. Thus one
who attains this is still not free from birth and death but
is caught in the trap of Mara (MA). Horner misses the
point that rebirth is the issue by translating "only as far
as reaching the plane of no- thing" (MLS 1:209).

303 Both Horner in MLS and Nm in Ms err in their transla-
tions of the account of the Bodhisatta's meeting with
Uddaka Ramaputta by assuming that Uddaka is identical
with Rama. However, as his name indicates, Uddaka was
the son ( putta ) of Rama, either biological or spiritual.
Rama himself must have already passed away before the
Bodhisatta arrived on the scene. It should be noted that
all references to Rama are in the past tense and the third
person, and that Uddaka in the end places the Bodhisatta
in the position of teacher. Though the text does not allow
for definite conclusions, this suggests that he himself had
not yet reached the fourth immaterial attainment.

304 MN 36, which includes the account of the Bodhisatta's
meetings with Alar a Kalama and Uddaka Ramaputta,
continues from this point with the story of the extreme
ascetic practices that brought him to the verge of death
and of his subsequent discovery of the Middle Way that
led to enlightenment.

305 MA identifies "this Dhamma" with the Four Noble
Truths. The two truths or states ( thana ) spoken of just
below - dependent origination and Nibbana - are the
truths of the origin of suffering and the cessation of suf-
fering, which respectively imply the truths of suffering
and the path.

306 Alaya. It is difficult to find for this word a suitable
English equivalent that has not already been assigned to
a more frequently occurring Pali term. Homer renders it
as "sensual pleasure," which appropriates the usual ren-
dering of kama and may be too narrow. In Ms and in
other published works Nm translates it as "something to
rely on," which may draw upon a connotation of the


Notes to Sutta 26 1217


word that is not the one intended here. MA explains alaya
as comprising both objective sense pleasures and the
thoughts of craving concerned with them; thus "worldli-
ness" has been chosen as sharing this twofold meaning of
the original.

307 MA raises the question why, when the Bodhisatta had
long ago made an aspiration to reach Buddhahood in
order to liberate others, his mind now inclined towards
inaction. The reason, the commentator says, is that only
now, after reaching enlightenment, did he become fully
cognizant of the strength of the defilements in people's
minds and of the profundity of the Dhamma. Also, he
wanted Brahma to entreat him to teach so that beings
who venerated Brahma would recognise the precious
value of the Dhamma and desire to listen to it.

308 These five monks attended on the Bodhisatta during his
period of self-mortification, convinced that he would
attain enlightenment and teach them the Dhamma. How-
ever, when he abandoned his austerities and resumed
taking solid food, they lost faith in him, accused him of
reverting to luxury, and deserted him. See MN 36.33.

309 Anantajina: perhaps this was an Ajlvakan epithet for the
spiritually perfected individual.

310 According to MA, Upaka thereafter fell in love with a
hunter's daughter and married her. When his marriage
turned out to be an unhappy one, he returned to the
Buddha, entered the Sangha, and became a non-returner.
He was reborn in the Avlha heaven, where he attained
arahantship.

311 Avuso : a familiar term of address used among equals.

312 See n.178.

313 The change in address from "friend" to "venerable sir"
( bhante ) indicates that they have now accepted the
Buddha's claim and are prepared to regard him as their
superior.

314 At this point the Buddha preached to them his first ser-
mon, the Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta, The Setting in
Motion of the Wheel of Dhamma, on the Four Noble
Truths. Two weeks later, after they had all become
stream-enterers, he taught them the Anattalakkhana Sutta,



1218 The Majjhima Nikaya


The Characteristic of Non-self, upon hearing which they
all attained arahantship. The complete narrative, found
in the Mahavagga (Vin i.7-14), is included in Nanamoli,
The Life of the Buddha, pp. 42-47.

315 This section reverts to the theme of the noble and ignoble
quests with which the Buddha's discourse opened. It is
intended to show that the adoption of the monastic life is
no automatic guarantee that one has embarked on the
noble quest, for the ignoble quest makes inroads upon
the monastic life as well.

316 This refers to the use of the four requisites with reflection
upon their proper purpose in the life of renunciation. See
MN 2.13-16.

317 See n.295.

318 See n.296.

SUTTA 27

319 According to the chronicles of Sri Lanka, this was the
first sutta preached by Mahinda Thera following his
arrival in Sri Lanka.

320 Vacchayana is Pilotika's clan name.

321 Nm translates ekabhattika, "one-mealer," in accordance
with the commentarial explanation as eating only in the
forenoon. According to the Vinaya the proper time for
bhikkhus to eat is between dawn and noon. From noon
until the next dawn only liquids are allowed.

322 This formula is analysed at Vsm I, 53-59. Briefly, the
signs ( nimitta ) are the most distinctive qualities of the
object which, when grasped at unmindfully, can kindle
defiled thoughts; the features ( anubyahjana ) are the
details that may subsequently catch the attention when
the first perceptual contact has not been followed up by
restraint. "States of covetousness and grief" signifies the
alternative reactions of desire and aversion, attraction
and repulsion, towards sense objects.

323 Covetousness ( abhijjha ) here is synonymous with sensual
desire ( kamacchanda ), the first of the five hindrances.

324 MA: He does not come to this conclusion about the


Notes to Suttas 27 and 28 1219


Triple Gem because the jhanas and the (mundane) direct
knowledges are held in common with those outside the
Buddha's Dispensation.

325 This, according to MA, shows the moment of the path,
and since at this point the noble disciple has still not
completed his task, he has not yet come to a conclusion
(na tveva nittham gato hoti) about the Triple Gem; rather,
he is in the process of coming to a conclusion ( nittham
gacchati). The sutta employs a pun on the meaning of the
expression "coming to a conclusion" that is as viable in
English as in Pali.

326 This shows the occasion when the disciple has attained
the fruit of arahantship, and having completed all his
tasks in every way, has come to the conclusion about the
Triple Gem.

SUTTA 28

327 This discourse has been published separately with intro-
duction and notes by Nyanaponika Thera, The Greater
Discourse on the Elephant-Footprint Simile.

328 The structure of this discourse may be outlined as fol-
lows: Ven. Sariputta first enumerates the Four Noble
Truths (§2). He then takes up the truth of suffering for
analysis into its various aspects (§3). From among these,
he selects the last and enumerates the five aggregates
affected by clinging (§4). He next selects the first aggre-
gate, that of material form (§5). Taking up each of the
great elements in turn, he shows it as having two aspects
- internal and external - the former being selected for
detailed analysis, the latter only briefly mentioned for
the sake of completeness and comparison (e.g., §§6-7).
Each of the elements is expounded as a basis for insight
meditation as well as for developing patience, faith, and
equanimity (e.g., §§8-10). Having finished examining
the elements, Ven. Sariputta next takes up the aspects of
the Four Noble Truths he earlier had put aside. He intro-
duces derivative material form by way of the sense fac-
ulties and their objects (§27, etc.), then he relates this to


1220 The Majjhinia Nikaya


the other four aggregates of the first noble truth, and
finally he sets this whole complex of ideas in relation to
the other three noble truths (§28, etc.).

329 Upadinna, "clung-to," is used in the Abhidhamma as a
technical term applicable to bodily phenomena that are
produced by kamma. Here, however, it is used in a more
general sense as applicable to the entire body insofar as it
is grasped as "mine" and misapprehended as a self. The
phrase "whatever else" is intended to include the earth
element comprised in those parts of the body not includ-
ed in the above enumeration. According to the Abhi-
dhamma analysis of matter, the four primary elements
are inseparable, and thus each element is also included,
though in a subordinate role, in the bodily phenomena
listed under the other three elements.

330 MA: This statement is made to underscore the insentient
nature ( acetandbhava ) of the internal earth element by
yoking it to the external earth element, the insentient
nature of which is much more easily discerned.

331 According to ancient Indian cosmology the cyclical
destruction of the world may be due to either water, fire,
or wind. See Vsm XIII, 30-65.

332 The notions "I," "mine," and "I am," represent the three
obsessions of personality view, craving, and conceit,
respectively. .

333 MA explains that this passage, referring to a bhikkhu
who practises meditation on the elements, is intended to
show his strength of mind in applying his comprehen-
sion of things to undesirable objects arisen at the "door"
of the ear. By contemplating the experience by way of
conditionality and impermanence, he transforms the
potentially provocative situation of being subjected to
abuse into an opportunity for insight.

334 Tassfl dtotarammanam eva cittam pakkhandati. This sentence
can be construed in two alternative ways, depending on
how the compound dhatarammanam is understood. Ven-
Nyanaponika takes it as the object of the verb pakkhan-
dati, and he understands dhatu here as "an impersonal
element in general" capable of including sound, contact,
feeling, etc. Thus he translates: "And his mind enters into


Notes to Sutta 28 1221


that very object [taking it just as an impersonal] ele-
ment." Nm reads the compound as an adjunct qualifying
citta, and supplies the object of the verb in parenthesis.
MA seems to support the former reading; MT explicitly
identifies dhatu as the earth element, thus supporting the
latter reading. MA explains the phrase "acquires deci-
sion" to mean that the meditator contemplates the situa-
tion by way of elements and thus has neither attachment
nor aversion concerning it.

335 MA: This passage is intended to show the strength of the
meditating bhikkhu on an occasion when he is subjected
to affliction by way of the body.

336 See MN 21.20.

337 MA: The recollection of the Buddha is undertaken here
by recalling that the Blessed One spoke this simile of the
saw, the recollection of the Dhamma by recalling the
advice given in the simile of the saw, and the recollection
of the Sangha by recalling the virtues of the bhikkhu who
can endure such abuse without giving rise to a mind of
hate. "Equanimity supported by the wholesome"
(upekkha kusalanissita ) is the equanimity of insight, the
sixfold equanimity of neither attraction nor aversion
towards agreeable and disagreeable objects that appear
at the six sense doors. Strictly speaking, the sixfold equa-
nimity pertains only to the arahant, but it is here ascribed
to the monk in training because his insight approximates
to the perfect equanimity of the arahant.

338 This is said to stress once again the egoless nature of the
body. MT: He shows that the four elements are only
mere elements not belonging to a self; they are without a
being, without a soul.

339 This section is set forth, according to MA, to introduce
the material form derived from the four great elements.
Derived material form, according to the Abhidhamma
analysis of matter, includes the five sense faculties
(] pasddarupa ) and the first four kinds of sense object, the
tangible object being identified with the primary ele-
ments themselves. "Corresponding (conscious) engage-
ment" ( tajjo sanlannaharo) is explained by MA as attention
(manasikdra) arising in dependence on the eye and forms;


1222 The Majjhima Nikaya


it is identified with the "five-door adverting conscious-
ness" {paiicadvaravajjamcitta), which breaks off the flow
of the life continuum (bhavanga) to initiate a process of
cognition. Even when forms come into range of the eye,
if attention is not engaged by the form because one is
occupied with something else, there is still no manifesta-
tion of the "corresponding class of consciousness," i.e.,
eye-consciousness.

340 This section is set forth to show the Four Noble Truths
by way of the sense doors. "What has thus come to be"
(, tathabhuta ) is the entire complex of factors arisen by
way of eye-consciousness. By analysing this complex
into the five aggregates, Ven. Sariputta shows that any
occasion of sense experience is comprised within the
truth of suffering.

341 This statement has not been traced directly to the
Buddha in any of the existing suttas in the Pali Canon.
MA glosses, perhaps with too little sensitivity to the
statement's profounder implications: "One who sees
dependent origination sees dependently arisen states
(] paticca samuppanne dhamme ); one who sees dependently
arisen states sees dependent origination."

342 The four terms - chanda, alaya, anunaya, ajjhosana - are
synonyms for craving ( tanha ).

343 Though only three of the Four Noble Truths are explicitly
shown in the te^t, the fourth truth is implied. According
to MA, it is the penetration of these three truths by the
development of the eight factors of the path.

344 MA identifies "mind" ( mano ) in this passage with the
life-continuum consciousness ( bhavangacitta ).

345 MA illustrates this case by the mind's preoccupation with
a familiar object when it does not notice the familiar details
of that object. The "corresponding class of conscious-
ness" here is mind-consciousness ( manovifimna ), which
takes non-sensuous objects as its sphere of cognition.

sutta 29

346 After Devadatta had unsuccessfully attempted to kill the
Buddha and usurp control of the Sangha, he broke away


Notes to Suttas 29 and 30 1223


from the Buddha and tried to establish his own sect with
himself at the head. See Nanamoli, The Life of the Buddha,
pp. 266-69.

347 "Knowledge and vision" ( Mnadassana ) here refers to the
divine eye (MA), the ability to see subtle forms invisible
to normal vision.

348 This translation follows the BBS and SBJ eds., which read
asamayavimokkham in the preceding sentence and
asamayavimuttiya in this sentence. The PTS ed., on which
both Homer and Nm based their translations, is evident-
ly mistaken in reading s amaya in the two compounds and
thanani instead of atthdnam. MA cites the Patisambhida-
tnagga (ii.40) for a definition of asamayavimokkha (lit., non-
temporary or "perpetual" liberation) as the four paths,
four fruits, and Nibbana, and of samayavimokkha (tempo-
rary liberation) as the four jhanas and four formless
attainments. See also MN 122.4.

349 "Unshakeable deliverance of mind" is the fruit of ara-
hantship (MA). Thus "perpetual liberation" - as including
all four paths and fruits - has a wider range of meaning
than "unshakeable deliverance of mind," which alone is
declared to be the goal of the holy life.

SUTTA 30

350 These six teachers, the Buddha's senior contemporaries,
all stood outside the fold of orthodox Brahmanism, and
their doctrines are indicative of the speculative audacity
of the Buddha's age. The six are often mentioned together
in the Canon. Their teachings, as understood within the
Buddhist community, are stated at DN 2.17-32/ii.52-59.

351 Precisely the same question is posed to the Buddha on
the eve of his Parinibbana by the wanderer Subhadda at
DN 16.5.26-27 / ii. 150-152.

352 It is this sentence, used in place of the sentence beginning
"He becomes intoxicated...," that distinguishes these
passages of this sutta from the corresponding passages of
the preceding sutta.

353 Although the jhanas may also have been included in the
attainment of concentration set forth in §10, and knowl-


1224 The Majjhima Nikaya

edge and vision was described as higher than the attain-
ment of concentration, the jhanas now become higher
than knowledge and vision because they are being treated
as the basis for the attainment of cessation and the
destruction of the taints (in §21).


SUTTA 31


Ven. Anuruddha was the Buddha's cousin; Vens.
Nandiya and Kimbila were Anuruddha's friends and
constant companions.

These are three of the "six memorable qualities"
explained at MN 48.6.

MA identifies this yakkha as a celestial king (devaraja)
included among the twenty-eight commanders of the
yakkhas mentioned at DN 32.10/iii.205.


SUTTA 32

357 The four assemblies are those of bhikkhus, bhikkhunls,
men lay followers, and women lay followers. The seven
underlying tendencies are enumerated at MN 18.8.
Ven. Ananda was declared by the Buddha to be the
pre-eminent disciple among those who had learned
much, and his discourses are said to have delighted the
four assemblies (DN 16.5.16/ii.l45).

358 Yatha sakarh patibhanam. This phrase might also be ren-
dered "according to his own intuition" or "according to
his own ideal." Nm renders "as it occurs to him"; Homer,
"according to his own capacity."

359 Ven. Revata was declared the pre-eminent disciple
among those who are meditators.

360 Ven. Anuruddha was the pre-eminent disciple among
those who possessed the divine eye.

361 Maha Kassapa was the pre-eminent disciple among those
who observed the ascetic practices.

362 Abhidhamma. Though the word cannot refer here to the
Pitaka of that name - obviously the product of a phase of
Buddhist thought later than the Nikayas - it may well
indicate a systematic and analytical approach to the doc-


Notes to Suttas 32-34 1225


trine that served as the original nucleus of the Abhi-
dhamma Pitaka. In a careful study of the contexts in
which the word "Abhidhamma" occurs in the Sutta
Pitakas of several early recensions, the Japanese Pali
scholar Fumimaro Watanabe concludes that the
Buddha's own disciples formed the conception of
Abhidhamma as an elementary philosophical study that
attempted to define, analyse, and classify dhammas and to
explore their mutual relations. See his Philosophy and its
Development in the NikUyas and Abhidhamma, pp. 34-36.

363 While the replies of the disciples hold up as the ideal a
bhikkhu who has already achieved proficiency in a par-
ticular sphere of the renunciant life, the Buddha's reply,
by focusing on a bhikkhu still striving for the goal, under-
scores the ultimate purpose of that life itself.

SUTTA 33

364 See MN 129.2, 27.

365 The Codes ( matika ) are probably the rules of the Pati-
mokkha abstracted from their explanatory matrix, as well
as lists of the primary doctrinal categories used for
expounding the Dhamma. For more on the matikds see
Watanabe, Philosophy and its Development in the Nikayas
and Abhidhamma, pp. 42-45.

366 See n.89.

367 At SN 47:6/v.l48 the four foundations of mindfulness
are called the proper pasture (gocara ) of a bhikkhu, in the
sense of being the proper sphere of his activity.

sutta 34

368 See n.273.

SUTTA 35

369 According to MA, Saccaka was the son of Nigantha (Jain)
parents who were both skilled in philosophical debate.
He had learned a thousand doctrines from his parents
and many more philosophical systems from others. In



1226 The Majjhima Nikaya


the discussion below he is referred to by his clan name,
Aggivessana.

370 Ven. Assaji was one of the first five disciples of the
Buddha.

371 This summary of the doctrine omits the second of the
three characteristics, dukkha or suffering. MA explains
that Assaji omitted this in order to avoid giving Saccaka
the opportunity to attempt a refutation of the Buddha's
doctrine.

372 MA explains that men play this game when preparing
hemp cloth. They bind up handfuls of rough hemp,
immerse them in the water, and beat them on planks to
the left, right, and middle. A royal elephant saw this
game, and plunging into the water, he took up water in
his trunk and sprayed it on his belly, his body, both
sides, and his groin.

373 In asserting the five aggregates to be self he is, of course,
directly contradicting the Buddha’s teaching of anatta. He
ascribes this view to the "great multitude" with the
thought that "the majority cannot be wrong."

374 The Buddha is here suggesting that the aggregates are
not self because they lack one of the essential characteris-
tics of selfhood - being susceptible to the exercise of mas-
tery. What cannot come under my mastery or perfect
control cannot be identified as "my self."

375 MA identifies this spirit ( yakkha ) as Sakka, ruler of the gods.

376 The text between the asterisks is absent from the PTS ed.
but is supplied from the BBS and SBJ eds. The five aggre-
gates are here called suffering because they are imperma-
nent and not susceptible to the exercise of mastery.

377 These are the characteristics of a sekha. The arahant, in
contrast, not only possesses the right view of non-self,
but has used it to eradicate all clinging, as the Buddha
will explain in §25.

378 MA gives several alternative explanations of these three
terms. They are mundane and supramundane wisdom,
practice, and deliverance. Or they are entirely supramun-
dane: the first is the right view of the path of arahantship,
the second the remaining seven path factors, the third the
supreme fruit (of arahantship). Or the first is the vision of


Notes to Suttas 35 and 36 1227


Nibbana, the second the path factors / the third the
supreme fruit.

379 Though Saccaka admitted defeat in debate, he must have
still considered himself a saint, and thus did not feel
impelled to go for refuge to the Triple Gem. Also,
because he continued to regard himself as a saint, he
must have felt that it was not proper for him to dedicate
the merit of the alms offering to himself, and thus he
wished to dedicate the merit to the Licchavis. But the
Buddha replies that the Licchavis will gain the merit of
providing Saccaka with food to offer to the Buddha,
while Saccaka himself will gain the merit of offering the
food to the Buddha. The merit of giving alms differs in
quality according to the purity of the recipient, as
explained at MN 142.6.

SUTTA 36

380 MA: Saccaka approached with the intention of refuting the
Buddha's doctrine, which he failed to do in his earlier
encounter with the Buddha (in MN 35). But this time he
came alone, thinking that if he were to suffer defeat no one
would know about it. He intended to refute the Buddha
with his question about sleeping during the day, which he
does not ask until close to the end of the sutta (§45).

381 MA: Ananda says this out of compassion for Saccaka,
thinking that if he gets to see the Buddha and to hear the
Dhamma, it will lead to his welfare and happiness for a
long time.

382 It will become clear from §5 that Saccaka identifies
"development of body" ( kayabhavana ) with the practice of
self-mortification. Because he does not see the Buddhist
bhikkhus engaged in self-mortification, he maintains that
they do not pursue development of the body. But the
Buddha (according to MA) understands "development of
body" as insight meditation, "development of mind" (citta-
bhavana) as serenity meditation.

383 These are the three mentors of the Ajlvakas; the last was
a contemporary of the Buddha, the former two are near
legendary figures whose identities remain obscure. The


1228 The Majjhima Nikaya


Bodhisatta had adopted their practices during his period
of asceticism - see MN 12.45 - but subsequently rejected
them as unconducive to enlightenment.

384 MA explains that "development of body" here is insight,
and "development of mind" concentration. When the
noble disciple experiences pleasant feeling, he does not
become overwhelmed by it because, through his devel-
opment of insight, he understands the feeling to be
impermanent, unsatisfactory, and essenceless; and when
he experiences painful feeling, he does not become over-
whelmed by it because, through his development of con-
centration, he is able to escape from it by entering into
one of the meditative absorptions.

385 Now the Buddha will answer Saccaka's questions by
showing first the extremely painful feelings he experi-
enced during his course of ascetic practices, and there-
after the extremely pleasant feelings he experienced dur-
ing his meditative attainments preceding his enlighten-
ment.

386 The PTS ed. is certainly mistaken in reading here
avupakattho, "not withdrawn." Nm in Ms had translated
this sentence from a reading which omitted cittena, "and
mentally." This translation follows the BBS ed., which
includes cittena. Although it may seem contradictory to
say that those t recluses and brahmins live mentally
withdrawn from sensual pleasures yet still have not
abandoned sensual desire, if we understand kama here
as physical objects productive of sensual pleasure the
contradiction will be resolved.

387 In this connection MA raises the question: Why did the
Bodhisatta undertake the practice of austerities if he could
have attained Buddhahood without doing so? It answers:
He did so, first, in order to show his own exertion to the
world, because the quality of invincible energy gave him
joy; and second, out of compassion for later generations,
by inspiring them to strive with the same determination
that he applied to the attainment of enlightenment.

388 This sentence, repeated at the end of each of the follow-
ing sections as well, answers the second of the two ques-
tions posed by Saccaka in §11.

389 MA: During the Bodhisatta's boyhood as a prince, on one


Notes to Sutta 36 1229


occasion his father led a ceremonial ploughing at a tradi-
tional festival of the Sakyans. The prince was brought to
the festival and a place was prepared for him under a
rose-apple tree. When his attendants left him to watch
the ploughing ceremony, the prince, finding himself all
alone, spontaneously sat up in the meditation posture
and attained the first jhana through mindfulness of
breathing. When the attendants returned and found the
boy seated in meditation, they reported this to the king,
who came and bowed down in veneration to his son.

390 This passage marks a change in the Bodhisatta's evalua-
tion of pleasure; now it is no longer regarded as some-
thing to be feared and banished by the practice of austeri-
ties, but, when bom of seclusion and detachment, is seen
as a valuable accompaniment of the higher stages along
the path to enlightenment. See MN 139.9 on the twofold
division of pleasure.

391 This sentence answers the first of the two questions
posed by Saccaka in §11.

392 MA explains the "sign of concentration" ( samadhinimitta )
here as the fruition attainment of emptiness ( sufinata -
phalasamapatti). See also MN 122.6.

393 This was the question that Saccaka originally intended to
ask the Buddha. MA explains that though arahants have
eliminated all sloth and torpor, they still need to sleep in
order to dispel the physical tiredness intrinsic to the body.

394 MA explains that even though Saccaka did not reach any
attainment or even become established in the Three
Refuges, the Buddha taught him two long suttas in order
to deposit in him a mental impression (vasana) corning fo
maturity in the future. For he foresaw that at a later time,
after the Dispensation became established in Sri Lanka,
Saccaka would be reborn there and would attain ara-
hantship as the great arahant, Kala Buddharakkhita Thera.

SUTTA 37

395 MA: Sakka asks about the preliminary practice of the ara-
hant bhikkhu, by which he becomes liberated by the
destruction of craving.



1230 The Majjhima Nikaya

396 MA explains this passage as follows: "Everything" ( sabbe
dhamma) is the five aggregates, the twelve bases, the eigh-
teen elements. These are "not worth adhering to" by way
of craving and views because they turn out in actuality to
be different from the way they are grasped: grasped as
permanent, pleasurable, and self, they turn out to be
impermanent, suffering, and not self. He "directly
knows" them as impermanent, suffering, and not self,
and "fully understands" them by scrutinising them in the
same way. "Contemplating impermanence," etc., is
accomplished by the insight knowledges of rise and fall
and of destruction and disappearance. "He does not cling"
to any formation by way of craving and views, does not
become agitated because of craving, and personally attains
NTibbana by the extinguishing of all defilements.

397 A personal name of Sakka, meaning "the owl."

398 The gods and titans ( asura ) are depicted in the Pali Canon
as being perpetually in a state of war with each other. See
especially the Sakkasamyutta (SN i.216-28).

399 One of the Four Great Kings, the ruler of the yakkhas, his
kingdom being in the north.

400 MA: He did this by entering into meditation on the
water-kasina and then resolving: "Let the foundation of
the palace be like water."

401 Sakka can refer to Ven. Maha Moggallana as a "compan-
ion in the holy life" because he himself had earlier
attained to stream-entry (DN 21.2.10/ii.289) and was
thus a noble disciple bound for the same deliverance that
Maha Moggallana had already achieved.

SUTTA38

402 According to MA, through faulty reasoning based on the
fact of rebirth, Sati came to the conclusion that a persist-
ing consciousness transmigrating from one existence to
another is necessary to explain rebirth. The first part of
the sutta (down to §8) replicates the opening of MN 22,
the only difference being in the view espoused.

403 This is the last of the six views described at MN 2.8. See
n.40.



Notes to Sutta 38 1231


404 MA: The purpose of the simile is to show that there is no
transmigration of consciousness across the sense doors.
Just as a log fire bums in dependence on logs and ceases
when its fuel is finished, without transmigrating to fag-
gots and becoming reckoned as a faggot fire, so too, con-
sciousness arisen in the eye door dependent on the eye
and forms ceases when its conditions are removed, with-
out transmigrating to the ear, etc., and becoming reck-
oned as ear-consciousness, etc. Thus the Buddha says in
effect: "In the occurrence of consciousness there is not
even the mere transmigration from door to door, so how
can this misguided Sati speak of transmigration from
existence to existence?"

405 Bhutam idan ti. MA: "This" refers to the five aggregates.
Having shown the conditionality of consciousness, the
Buddha states this passage to show the conditionality of
all the five aggregates, which come into being through
conditions, their "nutriment," and pass out of being with
the ceasing of those conditions. In the following
tadaharasambhavam, MA takes the tad as a nominative rep-
resenting the subject (= tarn khandhapancakam), but it seems
more likely that it qualifies ahara and that both should be
taken as ablatives, the subject idam being understood. This
interpretation seems confirmed by the third statement,
tadaharanirodha yam bhutam tarn nirodhadhammam. Homer's
"This is the origination of nutriment" is clearly wrong.

406 This is said to show the bhikkhus that they should not
cling even to the right view of insight meditation. The
simile of the raft refers to MN 22.13.

407 On the four nutriments, see n.120. MA: The Buddha
states this passage and the following one linking up the
nutriments with dependent origination in order to show
that he knows not merely the five aggregates but the
entire chain of conditions responsible for their being.

408 This is a statement of the abstract principle of dependent
origination exemplified by the twelvefold formula. The
abstract principle on cessation is stated at §22. Nm had
rendered the principle of arising thus: "That is when this
is; that arises with the arising of this." And the principle
of cessation: "That is not when this is not; that ceases with


1232 The Majjhima Nikaya


the cessation of this."

409 As in MN 2.7. According to MA, this "running back into
the past" and "running forward to the future" occur
because of craving and views. The next passage drives
home the lesson by ensuring that the bhikkhus speak
from their own personal knowledge.

410 The following portion of the discourse may be under-
stood as a concrete application of dependent origination
- so far expressed only as a doctrinal formula - to the
course of individual existence. The passage §§26-29 may
be taken to show the factors from consciousness through
feeling that result from past ignorance and formations,
§40 the causal factors of craving and clinging as they
build up a continuation of the samsaric round. The fol-
lowing section (§§31-40), connecting dependent origina-
tion to the appearance of the Buddha and his teaching of
the Dhamma, shows the practice of the Dhamma to be
the means of bringing the round to an end.

411 Gandhabba. MA: The gandhabba is the being to be reborn.
It is not someone (i.e., a disembodied spirit) standing
nearby watching the future parents having intercourse,
but a being driven on by the mechanism of kamma, due
to be reborn on that occasion.

412 MA explains that he delights in the painful feeling by
clinging to it with thoughts of "I" and "mine." In confir-
mation of the statement that a worldling may delight in
painful feelings, one thinks not only of full-fledged
masochism but also of the common tendency of people to
put themselves into distressing situations in order to
reinforce their sense of ego.

413 MA: An immeasurable mind ( appamilnacetaso ) is a supra-
mundane mind; this means that he possesses the path.

414 This statement reveals that the chain of dependent origi-
nation is broken at the link between feeling and craving.
Feeling arises necessarily because the body acquired
through past craving is subject to the maturation of past
kamma. However, if one does not delight in feeling/
craving will not have the opportunity to arise and set off
reactions of like and dislike that provide further fuel for


Notes to Suttas 38 and 39 1233


the round, and thus the round will come to an end.

SUTTA39

415 "Brahmin" should be understood in the sense explained
below, §24.

416 Shame (hiri) and fear of wrongdoing ( ottappa ) are two
complementary qualities designated by the Buddha "the
guardians of the world" (AN i.51) because they serve as
the foundation for morality. Shame has the characteristic
of disgust with evil, is dominated by a sense of self-
respect, and manifests itself as conscience. Fear of wrong-
doing has the characteristic of dread of evil, is dominated
by a concern for the opinions of others, and manifests
itself as fear of doing evil. See Vsm XIV, 142.

417 MA quotes SN 45:35-36/v.25: "What, bhikkhus, is
recluseship (samahha)? The Noble Eightfold Path. . . - this
is called recluseship. And what, bhikkhus, is the goal of
recluseship ( samahhattho )? The destruction of greed, hate,
and delusion - this is called the goal of recluseship."

418 MA gives a detailed elaboration of each of the five simi-
les. An English translation can be found in Nyanaponika
Thera, The Five Mental Hindrances, pp. 27-34.

419 Each of the explanations to follow involves a word play
that cannot be reproduced in English, e.g., a bhikkhu is a
recluse (s amana) because he has quieted down ( samita )
evil states, a brahmin because he has expelled ( bdhita ) evil
states, etc.

420 The term "washed" ( nhataka ) refers to a brahmin who,
at the end of his discipleship under his teacher, has
taken a ceremonial bath marking the end of his training.
See Sn 521.

421 The Pali word sotthiya (Sanskrit, srotriya) means a brah-
min well versed in the Vedas, one conversant with sacred
knowledge.

SUITA 40

422 Where the previous sutta used the phrase "things that


1234 The Majjhima Nikaya


make one a recluse" ( dhamma samanakaraM), the present
sutta speaks of "the way proper to the recluse" (s amana-
samicipatipada).

423 The first ten of these twelve "stains for a recluse" are
included among the sixteen "imperfections that defile the
mind" at MN 7.3.

424 MA: Because he has quieted down (s amita) all defile-
ments, he is a recluse in the highest sense ( para -
matthasamana).

sutta 41

425 This is a morally nihilistic materialist view that denies an
afterlife and kammic retribution. "There is nothing given"
means that there is no fruit of giving; "no this world, no
other world" that there is no rebirth into either this world
or a world beyond; "no mother, no father" that there is no
fruit of good conduct and bad conduct towards mother
and father. The statement about recluses and brahmins
denies the existence of Buddhas and arahants.

426 MA explains that "the gods of Radiance" is not a sepa-
rate class of gods but a collective name for the three
classes that follow; the same applies to "the gods of
Glory." This celestial hierarchy is explained in the
Introduction, pp. 46-48.

427 It should be noted that while "conduct in accordance
with the Dhamma" as described in the sutta is a neces-
sary condition for rebirth in the higher heavenly worlds
and for the destruction of the taints, it is by no means a
sufficient condition. Rebirth into the realms beginning
with the gods of Brahma's retinue requires the attain-
ment of jhana, rebirth into the Pure Abodes (the five
beginning with the Aviha gods) the attainment of the
stage of non-returner, rebirth into the immaterial planes
the corresponding immaterial attainments, and the
destruction of the taints requires the full practice of the
Noble Eightfold Path up to the path of arahantship.


Notes to Sutta 43 1235


SUTTA43

428 Ven. Maha Kotthita was declared by the Buddha the
foremost disciple of those who have attained the analyti-
cal knowledges (patisambhida ).

429 According to MA, the understanding of the Four Noble
Truths being discussed here is penetration by the supra-
mundane path. Thus the lowest type of person to be
described as "one who is wise" ( pannava ) is the person on
the path of stream-entry. The rendering of panna as "wis-
dom" (which I substituted for Nm's "understanding")
has the disadvantage of severing the tie, evident in the
Pali, with the verb pajanati. To preserve the connection,
here and in the preceding paragraph, the verb has been
rendered "wisely understand."

430 The Pali phrase defining consciousness uses only the
verb, vijanati vijanati, and this could as well be under-
stood to mean "One cognizes, one cognizes." Although
Nm had translated this phrase without any pronoun, the
pronoun has been inserted for greater intelligibility. The
renderings of the verb definitions of feeling and percep-
tion at §7 and §8 have been similarly augmented by the
addition of the pronoun.

431 MA: The question concerns the consciousness with
which the person described as "one who is wise" exam-
ines formations; that is, the consciousness of insight by
which that person arrived (at his attainment), the mind
which does the work of meditation. Ven. Sariputta
answers by explaining the meditation subject of feeling,
in the way it has come down in the Discourse on the
Foundations of Mindfulness (MN 10.32). The Pali con-
struction, sukhan ti pi vijanati, indicates that the feeling is
being treated as a direct object of consciousness rather
than as an affective tone of the experience; to show this
the words "this is" have been supplied in brackets and
the entire phrase set in quotation marks.

432 MA: This statement refers to the wisdom and conscious-
ness on the occasions of both insight and the supramun-
dane path. The two are conjoined in that they arise and
cease simultaneously and share a single sense base and


1236 The Majjhima Nikaya


object. However, the two are not inseparably conjoined
since, while wisdom always requires consciousness, con-
sciousness can occur without wisdom.

433 Wisdom, being the path factor of right view, is to be
developed as a factor of the path. Consciousness, being
included among the five aggregates that pertain to the
noble truth of suffering, is to be fully understood - as
impermanent, suffering, and not self.

434 MA says that the question and reply refer to mundane
feelings that are the objective range of insight. The Pali
construction here, sukham pi vedeti, etc., shows feeling as
simultaneously a quality of the object and an affective
tone of the experience by which it is apprehended. MA
points out that feeling itself feels; there is no other (sepa-
rate) feeler.

435 MA: The question and reply refer to mundane percep-
tions that are the objective range of insight.

436 MA: Wisdom has been excluded from this exchange
because the intention is to show only the states that are
conjoined on every occasion of consciousness.

437 MA: Purified mind-consciousness ( parisuddha mano-
vihhana) is the consciousness of the fourth jhana. It can
know the immaterial attainments insofar as one estab-
lished in the fourth jhana is capable of reaching them-
The base of neither-perception-nor : non-perception is
excluded here because, owing to its subtlety, it does not
come into the direct range of contemplation for the
attainment of insight.

438 MA: The eye of wisdom ( pahhdcakkhu ) is wisdom itself,
called an eye in the sense that it is an organ of spiritual
vision.

439 For the distinction between direct knowledge ( abhinna )
and full understanding ( parihhd ), see n.23.

440 MA: "The voice of another" ( parato ghosa ) is the teaching
of beneficial Dhamma. These two conditions are neces-
sary for disciples to arrive at the right view of insight
and the right view of the supramundane path. But
paccekabuddhas arrive at their enlightenment and fully
enlightened Buddhas at omniscience solely in depen-
dence on wise attention without "the voice of another."


Notes to Sutta 43 1237


441 MA: Right view here is the right view pertaining to the
path of arahantship. "Deliverance of mind" and "deliver-
ance by wisdom" both refer to the fruit of arahantship;
see n.83. When one fulfils these five factors, the path of
arahantship arises and yields its fruit.

442 "Renewal of being in the future" ( ayatim punabbhava-
bhinibbatti) is rebirth, the continuation of the round. This
question and the next may be regarded as synoptic
approaches to the entire twelvefold formula of depen-
dent origination laid out in MN 38.17 and 20.

443 The five outer sense faculties each have their own unique
object - forms for the eye, sounds for the ear, etc. - but
the mind faculty is able to experience the objects of all
five sense faculties as well as the mental objects exclusive
to itself. Hence the other five faculties have mind as their
resort ( manopatisaranam ).

444 MA identifies vitality ( dyu ) with the life faculty (jwit-
indriya), which has the function of maintaining and vital-
ising the other material phenomena of the living body.

445 Heat ( usma ) is the kamma-bom heat intrinsic to the liv-
ing body.

446 "Vital formations" {ayusankhara ) , according to MA,
denotes vitality itself. They cannot be states of feeling
because they are required to keep the body of a bhikkhu
alive when he has attained to the cessation of perception
and feeling. This special meditative attainment, in which
all mental activity ceases, is accessible only to non-
returners and arahants who also have mastery over the
eight attainments on the side of serenity. For a brief dis-
cussion see the Introduction, p. 28, and for the full
scholastic account, Vsm XXIII, 16-52. The cessation of
perception and feeling will be taken up again in MN 44.

447 That is, dead. The departure of consciousness from the
body is not sufficient to constitute death; vitality and the
vital heat must also perish.

448 The bodily formations are in-and-out breathing, the ver-
bal formations are applied thought and sustained
thought, the mental formations are perception and feel-
ing - see MN 44.14-15. MA says that the faculties during
the ordinary course of life, being impinged upon by



1238 The Majjhima Nikaya


sense objects, are afflicted and soiled like a mirror set up
at a crossroads; but the faculties of one in cessation
become exceptionally clear like a mirror placed in a case
and deposited in a box.

449 MA: The "signless deliverance of mind" ( animitta
cetovimutti) is the attainment of fruition; the "signs" are
objects such as forms, etc.; the "signless element" is
Nibbana, in which all signs of conditioned things are
absent.

450 MA identifies this suhhata cetovimutti with insight into
the voidness of selfhood in persons and things.

451 As above, the signless deliverance of mind is identified
by MA with the attainment of fruition. Of the four deliv-
erances of mind mentioned in §30, this one alone is
supramundane. The first three - the brahmaviharas, the
third immaterial attainment, and insight into the void-
ness of formations - all pertain to the mundane level.

452 Lust, hate, and delusion may be understood as "makers
of measurement" ( pamanakarana ) in that they impose lim-
itations upon the range and depths of the mind; MA,
however, explains this phrase to mean that the defile-
ments enable one to measure a person as a worldling, a
stream-enterer, a once-retumer, or a non-returner.

453 MA: There are twelve immeasurable deliverances of
mind: the four brahmaviharas, the four paths, and the four
fruits. The unshakeable deliverance of mind is the fruit of
arahantship. The statement that this unshakeable deliver-
ance is void of lust, hate, and delusion - repeated at the
end of §36 and §37 as well - also identifies it as the
supramundane deliverance of mind through voidness.

454 The word kihcana is explained by MA as meaning
"impediment" or "obstacle." Nm rendered it as "own-
ing." I have gone back to the original meaning "some-
thing" to maintain coherence with the statement that its
abandonment issues in deliverance of mind through
nothingness.

455 MA: There are nine deliverances of mind through nothing-
ness: the base of nothingness and the four paths and fruits.

456 MA interprets the phrase "maker of signs" ( nimitta ~
karana) to mean that lust, hate, and delusion brand a per-


Notes to Suttas 43 and 44 1239


son as a worldling or a noble one, as lustful, hating, or
deluded. But it may also mean that these defilements
cause the mind to ascribe a false significance to things as
being permanent, pleasurable, self, or beautiful.

457 MA: There are thirteen signless deliverances of mind:
insight, because it removes the signs of permanence,
pleasure, and self; the four immaterial attainments,
because they lack the sign of material form; and the four
paths and fruits, because of the absence of the sign of
defilements.

458 All the four deliverances of mind are one in meaning in
that they all refer to the fruition attainment of ara-
hantship. MA also points out that the four deliverances
are one in meaning because the terms - the immeasur-
able, nothingness, voidness, and the signless - are all
names for Nibbana, which is the object of the fruition
attainment of arahantship.

SUTTA44

459 Visakha was a wealthy merchant of Rajagaha and a non-
returner. Dhammadinna, his former wife in lay life, had
attained arahantship soon after her ordination as a
bhikkhunl. She was declared by the Buddha the foremost
bhikkhunl disciple in expounding the Dhamma.

460 MA explains the compound panc'upadanakkhandM as the
five aggregates that become the condition for clinging
(MT: as its objects). Since these five aggregates are, in
brief, the entire noble truth of suffering (MN 9.15; 28.3), it
will be seen that the first four questions pose an inquiry
into the Four Noble Truths expressed in terms of person-
ality rather than suffering.

461 MA: Because clinging is only one part of the aggregate of
formations (as defined here, greed), it is not the same as
the five aggregates; and because clinging cannot be alto-
gether disconnected from the aggregates, there is no
clinging apart from the aggregates.

462 These are the twenty kinds of personality view. MA
quotes Pts i. 144—45 to illustrate the four basic modes of
personality view in regard to material form. One may


1240 The Majjhima Nikaya


regard material form as self, in the way the flame of a
burning oil-lamp is identical with the colour (of the flame).
Or one may regard self as possessing material form, as a
tree possesses a shadow; or one may regard material form
as in self, as the scent is in the flower; or one may regard
self as in material form, as a jewel is in a casket.

463 The word khandha here has a different meaning than in
the more common context of the five aggregates affected
by clinging. It here refers to a body of training principles,
the three divisions of the Noble Eightfold Path into virtue
( sTla ), concentration ( samadhi ), and wisdom (pafina).

464 The four foundations of mindfulness are the basis of con-
centration ( samadhinimitta ) in the sense of being its condi-
tion (MA). Here it would seem incorrect to translate
nimitta as "sign," in the sense of either distinguishing
mark or object. The four right kinds of striving are
explained at MN 77.16.

465 MA: Dhammadinna anticipated Visakha's intention to
ask about the formations that cease when one enters
the attainment of cessation. Thus she explained the
three formations in this way rather than as wholesome
and unwholesome volitions of body, speech, and mind,
the meaning relevant within the context of dependent
origination.

466 MA explains further that the bodily formation and the
mental formation are said to be formations "bound up"
with the body and the mind in the sense that they are
formed by the body and by the mind, while the verbal for-
mation is a formation in the sense that it forms speech.
The verb form vitakketva vicaretva has been rendered in a
way that maintains consistency with the rendering of the
norms vitakka and vicara as "applied thought" and "sus-
tained thought."

467 Cessation can be attained only by a non-returner or an
arahant with mastery over the eight jhanic attainments.
The meditator enters each attainment in turn, emerges
from it, and contemplates it with insight as impermanent,
suffering, and not self. After completing this procedure

with the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception,

and attending to certain preliminaries, the meditator


Notes to Sutta 44 1241


determines to be without mind for a particular length of
time. His determination, backed by his previous accom-
plishments and preparations, leads him into the attain-
ment of cessation. See Vsm XXIII, 32-43.

468 Applied and sustained thought cease first in the second
jhana; in-and-out breathing cease next in the fourth
jhana; and perception and feeling cease last in the attain-
ment of cessation itself.

469 When the time decided upon by the determination for
the attainment has lapsed, by reason of that prior deter-
mination the meditator spontaneously emerges from the
attainment of cessation and the mind-process resumes.

470 MA: When one emerges from cessation, the conscious-
ness of fruition attainment arises first, and the perception
and feeling associated with that are the mental formation
that arises first. Then, with the subsequent descent into
the life continuum, the bodily formation, i.e., breathing,
recommences. And subsequently, when the meditator
resumes his ordinary activity, the verbal formation arises.

471 The first state of consciousness to arise on emerging from
cessation is that of fruition attainment, which is called
voidness, the signless, and the desireless because of its
own inherent quality and because of its object, Nibbana.
Here these three names for fruition are assigned to the
contact associated with fruition.

472 MT: Nibbana, the object of the fruition consciousness that
arises on emerging from cessation, is called seclusion
0 viveka ) because it is secluded from all conditioned things.

473 MT: The three defilements are called anusaya, underlying
tendencies, in the sense that they have not been aban-
doned in the mental continuum to which they belong
and because they are capable of arising when a suitable
cause presents itself.

474 MA explains that the bhikkhu suppresses the tendency to
lust and attains the first jhana. Having made the tenden-
cy to lust well suppressed by the jhana, he develops
insight and eradicates the tendency to lust by the path of
the non-returner. But because it has been suppressed by
the jhana, it is said "the underlying tendency to lust does
not underlie that."


1242 The Majjhima Nikaya


475 MA identifies "that base" (fadfiyatana), as well as "the
supreme liberations/' with arahantship. The grief that
arises because of that longing is elsewhere called "the
grief based on renunciation" (MN 137.13). MA explains
that one does not actually abandon the tendency to aver-
sion by means of that grief; rather, spurred on by the long-
ing for the supreme liberations, one takes up the practice
with firm determination and eradicates the tendency to
aversion by attaining the path of the non-returner.

476 MA: The bhikkhu suppresses the tendency to ignorance
with the fourth jhana, makes it well suppressed, and then
eradicates the tendency to ignorance by attaining the
path of arahantship.

477 The word "counterpart" ( patibhaga ) is used to express the
relationships of both opposition and supplementation.

478 Ignorance is its counterpart because neither-painful-nor-
pleasant feeling is subtle and difficult to recognise.

479 MT: Nibbana does have an opposite counterpart, namely,
conditioned states. But in the strict sense it has no sup-
plementary counterpart, for how can there be anything to
supplement Nibbana, the unconditioned?

480 MA: By saying this, the Buddha makes this sutta Word of
the Conqueror, stamped as it were with the seal of the
Conqueror.

SUTTA 46 ‘

481 A full analysis of the things that should and should not
be followed is presented in MN 114.

SUTTA 47

482 Parassa cetopariyayam ajanantena, reading the last word
with the BBS and SBJ eds. rather than with the PTS ed.
as ajanantena, which gives the positive sense "know-
ing." In the context the negative is clearly required,
since the bhikkhu who cannot know by direct cognition
of the Buddha's mind that he is fully enlightened must
arrive at this conclusion by inference from his bodily


Notes to Sutta 47 1243


and verbal behaviour and the other evidence adduced
by the sutta.

483 Bodily actions are "states cognizable through the eye."
Words are "states cognizable through the ear." MA: Just
as one infers the presence of fish from the rippling and
bubbling of water, so from a defiled action or utterance
one infers that the mind originating it is defiled.

484 MT: "Mixed states" ( vttimissa dhamma) refers to the con-
duct of one who is engaged in purifying his conduct but
is unable to keep to it consistently. Sometimes his con-
duct is pure or bright, sometimes impure or dark.

485 MA: The dangers are conceit, arrogance, etc. For some
bhikkhus, as long as they have not become well known
or acquired a following, these dangers are not found, and
they are very calm and quiet; but when they have
become famous and have acquired a following, they go
about behaving improperly, attacking other bhikkhus
like a leopard pouncing on a herd of deer.

486 MA: The opposite of those who teach a group - those
who dwell detached from a group - though not men-
tioned, should be understood.

487 MA: This passage shows the Buddha's impartiality
( tadibhava ) towards beings: he does not extol some and
disparage others.

488 No ca tena tammayo. MA glosses: "I do not identify with
that purified virtue, I am without craving for it."

489 So tasmim dhamme abhihhaya idh'ekaccam dhammarfi
dhammesu nittham gacchati. In order to convey the intend-
ed meaning I have rendered the second occurrence of
dhamma here as "teaching," i.e., the particular doctrine
taught to him, the plural dhammesu as "teachings," ancl
tasmim dhamme as "that Dhamma," in the sense of the
total teaching. MA and MT together explicate the mean-
ing thus: When the Dhamma has been taught by the
Teacher, by directly knowing the Dhamma through pen-
etration of the path, fruit, and Nibbana, the bhikkhu
comes to a conclusion about the preliminary teaching of
the Dhamma on the requisites of enlightenment ( bodhi -
pakkhiya dhammd).



1244 The Majjhima Nikaya


490 AkdravatT saddha dassanamulika dalha. This phrase refers to
the faith of a stream-enterer who has seen the Dhamma
through the supramundane path and can never point to
any other teacher than the Buddha.

SUTTA 48

491 The background to this sutta is the quarrel at Kosambl,
which is related at Vin Mv Kh 10 (Vin i.337 ff.) and in
Nanamoli, The Life of the Buddha, pp. 109-19. The quarrel,
which began with a casual misunderstanding of a minor
disciplinary rule, quickly flared up and divided a large
part of the Sangha and laity resident at Kosambl into two
hostile factions.

492 MA: This is the right view belonging to the noble path.

493 The Four Noble Truths.

494 Dhammata.

495 This is a breach of the code of monastic discipline from
which a bhikkhu can be rehabilitated either by a formal
act of the Sangha or by confession to another bhikkhu.
Even though a noble disciple may commit such an
offence unintentionally or through lack of knowledge, he
makes no attempt to conceal it but immediately discloses
it and seeks the means of rehabilitation.

496 Balata.

497 See n.91.

*

498 MA calls those seven factors the "great reviewing knowl-
edges" ( mahapaccavekkhanahana ) of a stream-enterer. On
the reviewing knowledges see Vsm XXII, 19-21.

sutta 49

499 The Miilapariyaya Sutta (MN 1) was also delivered by the
Buddha while he was living in the Subhaga Grove at
Ukkattha, and the similarity in formulation and theme
between these two suttas - perhaps the only two record-
ed as originating at Ukkattha - is striking. It is even pos-
sible to see the present sutta as a dramatic representation
of the same ideas set forth by the Miilapariyaya in abstract
philosophical terms. Thus Baka the Brahma may be taken


Notes to Sutta 49 1245


to represent being or personality in its most eminent
form, blindly engaged in the activity of conceiving, sus-
taining itself with its delusions of permanence, pleasure,
and selfhood. Underlying being is craving, symbolised by
Mara - seemingly inconspicuous in the assembly, yet the
real author of all the outpourings of conceiving, the one
who holds the entire universe in his grip. The alliance of
Brahma and Mara, God and Satan, an incomprehensible
union from the perspective of Western theism, points to
the thirst for continued being as the hidden root of all
world affirmation, whether theistic or non-theistic. In the
sutta the superficial theoretical contest between Baka and
the Buddha soon gives way to a gripping deep-level con-
frontation between Mara and the Buddha - Mara as crav-
ing demanding the affirmation of being, the Enlightened
One pointing to the cessation of being through the
uprooting of delight.

500 A similar encounter between the Buddha and Baka is
recorded at SN 6:4/i. 142-44, though without the dramat-
ic trappings of this meeting and with an extended
exchange in verse. According to MA and MT, he held
this etemalist view with regard to both his own individ-
ual personality and the world over which he presided.
His denial of an "escape beyond" is a rejection of the
higher jhana planes, the paths and fruits, and Nibbana,
none of which he even knows exist.

501 MA: When Mara discovered that the Buddha had gone to
the Brahma-world, he became anxious that the Brahmas
might be won over to the Dhamma and escape from his
control; thus he went there to discourage the Buddha
from teaching the Dhamma.

502 MA: Because they considered it to be impermanent, suf-
fering, and not self.

503 MA: In the four states of deprivation. Here, and at §10
and §29, the word "body" ( kaya ) is used to mean plane of
existence.

504 MA: They lauded it by speaking praise of it as perma-
nent, everlasting, eternal, etc., and delighted in it by way
of craving and views.

505 MA: In the Brahma-world.



1246 The Majjhima Nikaya


50 6 MA: Mara's intention is to show: "If you do as Brahma
says without overstepping his word, you too will shine
with the same splendour and glory as that with which
the Brahma's Assembly shines."

507 MA says that by the first two terms he tries to cajole the
Buddha, by the remaining two terms he threatens him.
To "hold to earth" is to grasp it by way of craving, con-
ceit, and views. The list of categories here, though con-
densed, is reminiscent of MN 1.

508 MA: Baka Brahma was a Brahma exercising sovereignty
over a thousand world-systems, but above him there are
Brahmas exercising sovereignty over two, three, four, five,
ten thousand, and a hundred thousand world-systems.

509 The body of Streaming Radiance is a realm of rebirth per-
taining to the second jhana, while Baka Brahma's realm
pertains only to the first jhana. The body of Refulgent
Glory and the body of Great Fruit in the next paragraph
pertain to the third and fourth jhanas.

510 In the Brahmajala Sutta (DN 1.2.2— 6/ii.l7— 19) the Buddha
shows how Maha Brahma gives rise to the delusion that
he is the supreme creator God. When the world begins to
form again after a period of dissolution, a being of great
merit is the first to be reborn in the newly formed Brahma-
world. Subsequently, other beings take rebirth in the
Brahma-world and this causes Maha Brahma to imagine
that he is their creator and master. See Bodhi, The Discourse
on the All-Embracing Net of Views, pp. 69-70, 159-166.

511 This passage, parallel in structure to the corresponding
passage of MN 1, is a difficult one. The difficulty centres
around the verb used in the first four statements
regarding earth, about which there is not even certainty
as to the correct reading. Nm prefers the BBS ed. read-
ing apahosim, which he takes to be an aorist of pabhavati,
meaning "to produce, to give being to." MA glosses: "I
did not grasp earth through the obsessions of craving,
conceit, and views." Nm had rendered ananubhutaih as
"not co-essential with." This has been replaced by "not
commensurate with," following MA's gloss, "not
reached by earth" and MT: "Its nature is not shared in
common with earth." MA says that what is "not com-




Notes to Sutta 49 1247


mensurate with the earthness of earth" is Nibbana, which
is detached from all that is conditioned.

512 The PTS ed. is surely mistaken in omitting here the ti
ending a direct quotation, and this misleads Homer into
ascribing the following passage to Baka rather than to the
Buddha (MLS 1:392). The BBS and SBJ eds. supply the ti.

513 These lines (which also appear as part of a full verse at
DN 11.85/i.223) have been a perennial challenge to
Buddhist scholarship, and even Acariya Buddhaghosa
seems to founder over them. MA takes the subject of the
sentence to be Nibbana, called "consciousness" in the sense
that "it can be cognized." This is obviously a contrived
derivation, since nowhere in the Canon is Nibbana ever
described as consciousness. MA offers three explanations
of the phrase sabbato pabham: (1) completely possessed of
splendour ( pabha ); (2) possessing being ( pabhutam ) every-
where; and (3) a ford ( pabham ) accessible from all sides,
i.e., through any of the thirty-eight meditation objects.
Only the first of these seems to have any linguistic legiti-
macy. Nm, in Ms, explains that he takes pabham to be a
negative present participle of pabhavati - apabham - the
negative-prefix a dropping off in conjunction with
sabbato: "The sense can be paraphrased freely by 'not
predicating being in relation to "all,"' or 'not assuming of
"all" that it is or is not in an absolute sense.'"

As an alternative translation more in keeping with MA,
Maurice Walshe renders: "...consciousness [that] is sign-
less, boundless, all-luminous" ( Thus Have I Heard, p. 179).

514 The Buddha's disappearance seems to be a "visible"
demonstration of his verse. Having extirpated delight in
being, he is able to vanish from the sight of Baka, thfe
supreme representative of being and world affirmation.
But Baka, bound to being by clinging, cannot transcend
the range of the Buddha's knowledge, which encompass-
es both being and non-being at the same time that it tran-
scends them.

515 This is the same inclination that arose in the Buddha's
mind in the period immediately after his enlightenment -
see MN 26.19. Compare also DN 16.3.34/ii.ll2 where
Mara attempts to persuade the newly enlightened



1248 The Majjhima Nikaya


Buddha to pass away peacefully at once.

516 Tadiso: that is, whether he teaches or not he remains the
Tathagata.

SUITA 50

517 The name means "the Corrupter" or "the Corrupted
One." In the Buddhist conception of the universe the
position of Mara, like that of Maha Brahma, is a fixed one
that is assumed by different individuals in accordance
with their kamma.

518 Kakusandha was the first Buddha to arise in this present
cosmological cycle called the "Auspicious Age." He was
followed by the Buddhas Konagamapa and Kassapa,
after whom the present Buddha Gotama arose.

519 The name means "the Unrivalled."

520 One who has attained to cessation, it seems, is not subject
to injury or death within the attainment itself. At
Vsm XXIII, 37 it is said that the attainment protects even
his belongings such as his robes and seat from destruction.

521 The name means "the Survivor."

522 That is, by causing defilements to arise in their minds, he
will prevent them from escaping from samsara.

523 MA takes pains to point out that Mara did not exercise
control over their actions, in which case he alone would
have been responsible and the brahmins could not have
generated bad kamma by their deeds. Rather, Mara
caused the brahmins to imagine scenes of the bhikkhus
engaged in improper conduct, and this aroused their
antagonism and induced them to harass the bhikkhus.
Mara’s intent in doing so was to make the bhikkhus give
rise to anger and dejection.

524 "The Kinsman" ( bandhu ) is Brahma, who was called thus
by the brahmins because they regarded him as their pri-
mal ancestor. MA explains that it was a belief among the
brahmins that they themselves were the offspring of
Brahma's mouth, the khattiyas of his breast, the vessas of
his belly, the suddas of his legs, and samanas of the soles
of his feet.


Notes to Suttas 50 and 51 1249


525 JMyanti pajjMyanti nijjhayanti apajjhayanti. Though the
verbs individually do not have an established pejorative
sense, the string is obviously intended as a denigration.
At MN 108.26 the four verbs are used to describe the
meditation of one whose mind is obsessed by the five
hindrances.

526 The four brahmaviharas are the appropriate antidote for
the hostility of others, as well as for the tendencies to
anger and dejection in one's own mind.

527 This time Mara's intent was to cause the bhikkhus to fall
victim to pride, complacency, and negligence.

528 MA quotes a sutta (AN 7:46/iv. 46-53) stating that these
four meditations are the antidotes, respectively, for sex-
ual desire, craving for tastes, attraction to the world, and
infatuation with gain, honour, and praise.

529 MA: The elephant look (ntlgapalokita) means that without
twisting his neck, he turns his whole body in order to look.
The Mara DusI did not die because of the Buddha's ele-
phant look, but because the evil kamma he generated in
wronging a great disciple cut off his life right on the spot.

530 The Great Hell, also called Avici, is described in greater
detail in MN 130.16-19.

531 MA: This feeling, experienced in the auxiliary (ussada) of
the Great Hell, is said to be more painful than the feel-
ings experienced in the Great Hell itself.

532 The Buddha Kakusandha is called a brahmin in the sense
of MN 39.24.

533 The reference is to SN 51:14 / v.269-70.

534 See MN 37.11.

535 See MN 37.12.

536 The reference is to SN 6:5/i.l45.

537 This verse refers to Ven. Moggallana's mastery over the
supernormal power of travelling in space like a bird.

SUTTA 51

538 From this difference in their manner of greeting the
Buddha it is evident that Pessa is a follower of the
Buddha, whereas Kandaraka - despite his respect and


1250 The Majjhima Nikaya


admiration - belongs to a different religious community.

539 MA: Out of respect for the Buddha and because of their
training, the bhikkhus did not converse with one anoth-
er, nor did they even clear their throats. Unmoving in
body, undistracted in mind, they sat surrounding the
Blessed One like ruddy clouds surrounding the peak of
Mount Sineru. Kandaraka must have been privately com-
paring this assembly of the bhikkhus with the assemblies
of wanderers as described in MN 76.4.

540 MA explains that Kandaraka did not have direct knowl-
edge of the Buddhas of the past and future. He made this
statement as a way of expressing his admiration for the
well-trained, disciplined, and calm Sangha of bhikkhus.
The Buddha, however, confirms this on the basis of
direct knowledge.

541 MA: The four foundations of mindfulness are brought in to
show the cause for the calm and tranquil deportment of the
Sangha. On the foundations of mindfulness, see MN 10.

542 MA glosses: "We too, when we get an opportunity, from
time to time attend to this; we are also practitioners; we
do not completely neglect meditation."

543 The point of this statement is that an animal's guile and
trickery is very limited, while that of human beings is
inexhaustible.

544 MA explains that this passage is introduced as a sequel
to Pessa's statement that the Blessed One knows the wel-
fare and harm of beings; for the Buddha shows that the
first three kinds of persons are practising in harmful
ways, while the fourth is practising in a beneficial way.
The passage can also be connected with Kandaraka 's
praise of the Sangha; for the Buddha will show three
ways in which he does not train the Sangha and the one
way in which all the Buddhas of the past, present, and
future train their Sanghas.

545 SukhapatisamvedT brahmabhutena attanH. MA: He experi-
ences the bliss of the jhanas, paths, fruits, and Nibbana.
"Brahma" here should be understood in the sense of holy
or excellent (settha).

546 MA: Pessa would have attained the fruit of stream-entry,
but he rose from his seat and left before the Buddha had


Notes to Suttas 51 and 52 1251


completed his discourse. The benefits he did receive are
two: he gained greater confidence in the Sangha, and he
gave rise to a new method for comprehending the foun-
dations of mindfulness.

547 This passage details the austerities undertaken by many
of the Buddha's ascetic contemporaries, as well as by the
Bodhisatta himself during his period of striving for
enlightenment. See MN 12.45.

548 This passage shows the practice of one who torments
himself in the hope of gaining merit and then offers sacri-
fices that involve the slaughter of many animals and the
oppression of his workers.

549 This is the arahant. To show clearly that he torments
neither himself nor others, the Buddha next undertakes
to describe the path of practice by which he arrived at
arahantship.

SUTTA 52

550 All these expressions are descriptive of arahantship.

551 Abhisankhatam abhisancetayitam. The two terms are fre-
quently used in conjunction and indicate a conditioned
state in which volition ( cetana ) is the most prominent
conditioning factor.

552 This passage explains a method for developing "insight
preceded by serenity" ( samathapubbangama vipassand; see
AN 4:170/ ii.157). Having first attained a jhana, the med-
itator emerges from it and contemplates that state as
brought into being by conditions, particularly volition.
On the basis of this, he ascertains its impermanence, and
then contemplates the jhana with insight into the three
marks of impermanence, suffering, and non-self. See also
MN 64.9-15 for a somewhat different approach to devel-
oping insight on the basis of the jhanas.

553 Dhammaragena dhammanandiya. MA: These two terms sig-
nify desire and attachment ( chandaraga ) with respect to
serenity and insight. If one is able to discard all desire
and attachment concerning serenity and insight, one
becomes an arahant; if one cannot discard them, one
becomes a non-returner and is reborn in the Pure


1252 The Majjhima Nikaya


Abodes.

554 The base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception is not
mentioned because it is too subtle a state for its constituent
factors to be used as objects of insight contemplation.

555 The eleven "doors to the Deathless" are the four jhanas,
the four brahmaviharas, and the first three immaterial
attainments used as bases for the development of insight
and attainment of arahantship.

556 This would be five hundred kahapanas, the latter being
the standard monetary unit of the time.


SUTTA 53

557 It was believed to be a source of merit for those who con-
struct a new dwelling to invite an eminent religious per-
sonage to dwell in it even for a single night before they
inhabit it themselves. This belief still continues in
Buddhist lands today, and people who have built a new
house for themselves will often invite bhikkhus to hold
an all-night recitation of paritta (protective) suttas in their
new home before they move in.

558 Sekho patipado. On the sekha, see n.21.

559 On the distinction between shame ( hiri ) and fear of
wrongdoing ( ottappa ), see n.416.

560 Here the text explains sati, mindfulness, by reference to
its original meaning of memory. The relationship
between the two senses of sati - memory and attentive-
ness - may be formulated thus: keen attentiveness to the
present forms the basis for an accurate memory of the
past. MA takes the mention of sati here to imply all seven
factors of enlightenment, among which it is the first.

561 MA: This is the wisdom of insight and of the path, capa-
ble of penetrating the rise and fall of the five aggregates.
Path wisdom is called "penetrative" ( nibbedhika ) because
it pierces through and eradicates the mass of greed, hate,
and delusion; insight wisdom is called penetrative
because it pierces through them temporarily and because
it leads to penetration by the path.

562 As at MN 16.26.


Notes to Suttas 53 and 54 1253


563 This refers to the fourth jhana, which is the foundation
for the three knowledges to follow.

564 At this point he ceases to be a sekha and becomes an
arahant.

565 These constitute the traditional list of fifteen factors mak-
ing up conduct ( carana ), which are often conjoined with
the three following types of knowledge in the complete
course of training. The two together enter into the
common epithet of the Buddha and the arahants, vijja-
caranasampanna, “perfect in true knowledge and con-
duct." See Vsm VII, 30-31.

566 The verse was approved by the Buddha at DN 3.1.28/L99.
The Brahma Sanankumara, “Forever Young," according
to MA was a youth who attained jhana, passed away, and
was reborn in the Brahma-world, retaining the same
handsome form he possessed in his existence in the
human world. See DN 18.17-29/ii.210-218.

SUTTA 54

567 Translated literally the Pali reads simply "no rapacious
greed." Since, in the English idiom, it is difficult to see
how the mere absence of an evil can serve as a support, I
have added the phrase "refraining from" here and in the
next two cases, which are also expressed as simple nega-
tives in the Pali.

568 MA: Although the killing of living beings is not included
among the ten fetters and five hindrances, it may be
called a fetter in the sense of binding one to the round of
rebirths and a hindrance in the sense of obstructing one's
true welfare.

569 MA: Killing and taking what is not given are to be aban-
doned by bodily virtue; false speech and malicious
speech, by verbal virtue; rapacious greed, angry despair,
and arrogance, by mental virtue. Spiteful scolding (which
can include violent reprisals) is to be abandoned by both
bodily and verbal virtue.

570 These similes for the dangers in sensual pleasures are
alluded to at MN 22.3, though this sutta does not elabo-


1254 The Majjhima Nikaya


rate on the last three similes mentioned there.

571 According to MA, the "equanimity that is based on diver-
sity" is equanimity (i.e., apathy, indifference) related to
the five cords of sensual pleasure; the "equanimity that is
based on unity" is the equanimity of the fourth jhana.

572 In Ms, Nm had followed the gloss of MA in rendering
ajaniya as "those who know" (taking the word as derived
from ajanati); it seems far preferable, however, to under-
stand the word here as a metaphorical expression in its
literal meaning "thoroughbred." See MN 65.32 for assa-
janiya, "thoroughbred colt", and for purisajamya, "thor-
oughbred man" (i.e., an arahant), see AN 9:10/v, 324.

SUTTA 55

573 Jlvaka was the abandoned child of a courtesan.
Discovered and raised by Prince Abhaya, he studied
medicine at Takkasila and was later appointed the per-
sonal physician of the Buddha. He became a stream-
enterer after hearing the Buddha teach the Dhamma.

574 This passage states clearly and explicitly the regulations
on meat-eating laid down by the Buddha for the Sangha.
It will be noted that the Buddha does not require the
bhikkhus to observe a vegetarian diet, but permits them
to consume meat when they are confident that the animal
has not been slaughtered especially to provide them with
food. Such meat is called tikotiparisuddha, "pure in three
aspects," because it is not seen, heard, or suspected to
come from an animal killed specifically for the bhikkhu.
The lay Buddhist's precept of abstaining from the taking
of life would prohibit him from killing for his food, but
does not proscribe purchasing meat prepared from ani-
mals already dead. For more on this issue see Vin Mv
Kh 6/i.237-38, and I.B. Horner, Early Buddhism and the
Taking of Life, pp. 20-26.

575 Here the Buddha shows that he does not merely abide in
loving-kindness by suppressing his ill will with jhana
based on loving-kindness, as the divinity Brahma does,
but has eradicated the roots of ill will through his attain-
ment of arahantship.


Notes to Suttas 55 and 56 1255


576 Cruelty, discontent, and aversion ( vihesa , arati, patigha)
are the opposites of compassion, appreciative joy, and
equanimity respectively.

577 It is puzzling that Jlvaka here declares himself a lay fol-
lower as if for the first time when he had already been
established in stream-entry. Perhaps this formula was
used as a means of reaffirming one's dedication to the
Triple Gem and was not restricted to an initial profession
of going for refuge.

SUTTA 56

578 This means "Tall Ascetic," a name given to him because
of his height.

579 Danda, originally a stick or staff, acquires the meaning of
rod as an instrument of punishment, and subsequently
comes to mean punishment or infliction itself, even with-
out reference to an instrument. Here the idea seems to be
suggested that the Jains regarded bodily, verbal, and
mental activity as instruments by which the individual
torments himself by prolonging his bondage in samsara
and torments others by causing them harm.

580 MA: The Niganthas held that the first two "rods" create
kamma independently of the involvement of the mind
( acittaka ) just as, when the wind blows, the branches sway
and the leaves rustle without any initiative of mind.

581 The Buddha may have said this because in his teaching
volition ( cetana ), a mental factor, is the essential ingredi-
ent of kamma, and in its absence - that is, in the case of
unintentional bodily or verbal activity - no kamma is
created. MA, however, maintains that the Buddha said
this referring to wrong view with fixed consequences
(i niyata miccha ditthi), and it quotes in support
AN l:18.3/i.33: "Bhikkhus, I see nothing so blamewor-
thy as wrong view. Wrong view is the most blamewor-
thy of all things." These types of wrong view are
described at MN 60.5, 13 and 21.

582 As at MN 35.5.

583 The parenthetical additions in the previous paragraph,
inserted by Nm, are supplied from MA. Nm, in Ms,


1256 The Majjhima Nikftya


sums up the argument thus: The Niganthas are not
allowed to use cold water (because they regard it as
containing living beings). By his bodily and verbal
refusal of cold water he has kept his bodily and verbal
conduct pure, but if he longs in his mind for cold water
his mental conduct is impure, and thus he is reborn
among the "mind-bound gods" ( manosatta deva).

584 At §15 Upali admits that at this point he had already
acquired confidence in the Buddha. However, he contin-
ued to oppose him because he wished to hear the
Buddha's varied solutions to the problem.

585 This statement, at DN 2.29/L5 7, is ascribed to the
Nigantha Nataputta himself as a formulation of the Jain
doctrine. Nm points out in Ms that it may involve a pun
on the word vari, which can mean both "water" and
"curb" (from vareti, to ward off). In my translation of the
Samahhaphala Sutta, The Discourse on the Fruits of
Recluseship, p. 24, 1 render it based on the Digha commen-
tary as follows: "A Nigantha is restrained with regard to
all water; he is endowed with the avoidance of all evil; he
is cleansed by the avoidance of all evil; he is suffused
with the avoidance of all evil." Though the statement
conveys a concern for moral purity, the tone is decidedly
different from that of the Buddha's teachings.

586 The Buddha points to a contradiction between the Jain
thesis that, even in the absence of volition, the "bodily
rod" is the most reprehensible of all, and their assertion
that the presence of volition significantly alters the moral
character of an action.

587 See Jat iii.463, v.l33ff., 267; v.144; vi.389, v.267; v.114, 267;
Miln 130.

588 MA: Vision of the Dhamma ( dhammacakkhu ) is the path of
stream-entry. The phrase "All that is subject to arising is
subject to cessation" shows the mode in which the path
arises. The path takes cessation (Nibbana) as its object,
but its function is to penetrate all conditioned states as
subject to arising and cessation.

589 The "Dhamma" referred to here is the Four Noble
Truths. Having seen these truths for himself, he has cut
off the fetter of doubt and now possesses the "view that


Notes to Suttas 56 and 57 1257


is noble and emancipating and (which) leads the one
who practises in accordance with it to the complete
destruction of suffering" (MN 48.7).

590 MA: Upali says this referring to the path of stream-entry
he had penetrated earlier.

591 See MN 16.3-7.

592 The PTS and SBJ eds. read vessantarassa; the BBS ed. of
text and MA read vesamantarassa; MT supports the for-
mer reading. MA explains: "He has transcended the
unrighteous state ( visama ) of lust, etc."

593 Monapattassa. The "silence" is wisdom, related to muni,
silent sage.

594 The "banner" is the conceit "I am." See MN 22.35.

595 Nippapancassa. See n.229.

596 Isisattamassa. MA interprets this to mean "the seventh
seer" - in line with the brahmanic conception of the
seven rishis - and takes it as referring to Gotama's status
as the seventh Buddha since VipassI (see DN 14.1.4/ii.2).
It is more probable, however, that sattama here is the
superlative of sad, and thus that the compound means
"the best of seers." The expression isisattama occurs at
Sn 356, and the commentary to that verse allows both
interpretations, offering uttama as a gloss on sattama.

597 This refers to the absence of attachment and repulsion.

598 Nm translates from a Siamese alternative reading given
in the BBS ed., appabhitassa, pointing out that the PTS
ed.'s appahinassa does not make sense here.

599 MA: A heavy sorrow arose in him because of the loss of
his lay supporter, and this produced a bodily disorder
that resulted in his vomiting hot blood. After vomiting
hot blood, few beings can continue to live. Thus they
brought him to Pava on a litter, and shortly thereafter he
passed away.

SUTTA 57

600 MA: Punna wore horns on his head, tied a tail to his
backside, and went about eating grass together with the
cows. Seniya performed all the actions typical for a dog.

601 It should be noted that a wrong ascetic practice has less


1258 The Majjhima Nikaya


severe consequences when it is undertaken without
wrong view than when it is accompanied by wrong
view. Although few nowadays will take up the dog-duty
practice, many other deviant lifestyles have become
widespread, and to the extent that these are justified by a
wrong view, their consequences become that much more
harmful.

602 Sabyabajjham kayasankharam ( vacisankharam , mano-
sankMrarft) abhisankharoti. Here an "afflictive bodily for-
mation" may be understood as the volition responsible
for the three courses of unwholesome bodily action; an
"afflictive verbal formation" as the volition responsible
for the four courses of unwholesome verbal action; and
an "afflictive mental formation" as the volition responsi-
ble for the three courses of unwholesome mental action.
See MN 9.4.

603 He is reborn in one of the states of deprivation - hell, the
animal kingdom, or the realm of ghosts.

604 Bhuta bhutassa upapatti hoti. MA: Beings are reborn
through the actions they perform and in ways conform-
ing to those actions. The implications of this thesis are
explored more fully in MN 135 and MN 136.

605 Here the volitions responsible for the ten courses of
wholesome action, together with the volitions of the
jhanas, are intended.

606 He is reborn in 'a heavenly world.

607 Strictly speaking, no volitional action can be simultane-
ously both wholesome and unwholesome, for the voli-
tion responsible for the action must be either one or the
other. Thus here we should understand that the being
engages in a medley of wholesome and unwholesome
actions, none of which is particularly dominant.

608 MA: This is the volition of the four supramundane paths
culminating in arahantship. Although the arahant per-
forms deeds, his deeds no longer have any kammic
potency to generate new existence or to bring forth
results even in the present existence.

609 MA explains that pabbajja, the going forth, is mentioned
here only in a loose figure of speech. In actual fact, he
receives the going forth before the probationary period


Notes to Suttas 57-59 1259


and then lives on probation for four months before
being entitled to receive upasampadn, full admission to
the Sangha.

610 MA: The Buddha can decide: "This person must live on
probation, this one need not live on probation."

SUTTA 58

611 Prince Abhaya was a son of King Bimbisara of Magadha,
though not the heir to the throne.

612 Both horns of the dilemma devised by the Nigantha
Nataputta presupposed that the Buddha would give a
one-sided answer. Now that a one-sided answer has been
rejected, the dilemma becomes inapplicable.

613 The Buddha does not hesitate to rebuke and admonish
his disciples when he sees that such speech will promote
their welfare.

614 MA says that dhammadhatu ("element of things") refers
to the Buddha's knowledge of omniscience. Dhamma-
dhatu here should not be confused with the same term
used to signify the element of mind-objects among the
eighteen elements, nor does it bear the meaning of an
all-embracing cosmic principle that the term acquires in
Mahayana Buddhism.

SUTTA 59

615 Pancakanga, the carpenter for King Pasenadi of Kosala,
was a devoted follower of the Buddha. He reappears in
MN 78 and MN 127.

616 The two kinds of feeling are bodily and mental feeling, or
(less commonly) the two mentioned by Pancakanga in §3.
The three kinds are the three mentioned by Udayin in §3.
The five kinds are the faculties of (bodily) pleasure, (men-
tal) joy, (bodily) pain, (mental) grief, and equanimity.
The six kinds are the feelings bom of contact through the
six sense faculties. The eighteen kinds are the eighteen
kinds of mental exploration - exploring the six sense
objects that are productive of joy, productive of grief, and


1260 The Majjhima Nikaya


productive of equanimity (see MN 137.8). The thirty-six
kinds are the thirty-six positions of beings - the six kinds
of joy, grief, and equanimity each based either on the
household life or on renunciation (see MN 137.9-15). The
hundred and eight kinds are the previous thirty-six consid-
ered as referring to the past, present, and future.

617 MA points out that by speaking of the neither-painful-
nor-pleasant feeling of the fourth jhana as a kind of
pleasure, the Buddha is implicitly endorsing the view
put forth by Pancakanga.

618 MA: Both felt pleasure and unfelt pleasure are found (the
latter being the pleasure pertaining to the attainment of
cessation). The Tathagata describes both as pleasure in the
sense that they are without suffering ( niddukkhabhava ).

sutta 60

619 MA: The Buddha began by asking this question because
the village of Sala was situated at the entrance to a forest,
and many recluses and brahmins of diverse creeds
would stay there overnight, expounding their own views
and tearing down the views of their opponents. This left
the villagers perplexed, unable to commit themselves to a
particular teaching.

620 Apannakadhammg. MA explains this as a teaching that is
uncontradictable, free from ambiguity, definitely accept-
able ( aviraddho advejjhagdmT ekamsagahiko). The term also
occurs at AN 3:16/i.ll3 and AN 4:71/ii.76.

621 The three views discussed in §§5, 13 and 21 are called
wrong views with fixed evil result ( niyata micchd ditthi).
To adhere to them with firm conviction closes off the
prospect of a heavenly rebirth and the attainment of lib-
eration. For a fuller discussion see Bodhi, Discourse on the
Fruits of Recluseship, pp. 79-83.

The examination of these views unfolds according to
the following pattern: The Buddha discloses the wrong
view A and its antithesis B. Taking up A for examination
first, in A.i he shows the pernicious effect of this view on
bodily, verbal, and mental conduct. In A.ii he proceeds
from the judgement that the view is actually wrong and


Notes to Sutta 60 1261


elicits additional negative consequences of its adoption.
Then in A.iii he shows how a wise person comes to the
conclusion that whether or not the view is true, it serves
his best interest to reject it.

Next, position B is considered. In B.i the Buddha
describes the wholesome influence of this view on con-
duct. In B.ii he elicits additional positive consequences of
adopting such a view. And in B.iii he shows how a wise
person comes to the conclusion that, irrespective of its
actual veracity, it serves his best interest to conduct his
affairs as though the view is true.

622 See n.425 for clarification of several expressions used in
the formulation of this view.

623 The Pali terms are susllya and dusilya. Since "corrupt
virtue" sounds self-contradictory, "conduct" has been
used in my rendering of the latter expression. Nm had
used "unvirtuousness."

624 He has made himself safe ( sotthi ) in the sense that he will
not be subject to suffering in a future existence. However,
he is still liable to the types of suffering to be encountered
in this existence, which the Buddha is about to mention.

625 Natthikavada, lit. "the doctrine of non-existence," is so
called because it denies the existence of an afterlife and of
kammic retribution.

626 His undertaking of the incontrovertible teaching
"extends only to one side" in the sense that he makes
himself safe with regard to the next life only on the pre-
supposition that there is no afterlife, while if there is an
afterlife he loses on both counts.

627 Atthikavada: the affirmation of the existence of an afterlife
and of kammic retribution.

628 His undertaking "extends to both sides" since he reaps
the benefits of his view affirming the afterlife whether or
not an afterlife actually exists.

629 This doctrine of non-doing (akiriyavada) , in the
Sdmannaphala Sutta (DN 2.17/i.52-53), is attributed to
Purana Kassapa. Although on first encounter the view
seems to rest on materialist premises, as the previous
nihilistic view does, there is canonical evidence that
Purana Kassapa subscribed to a fatalistic doctrine. Thus


1262 The Majjhima Nikaya



his moral antinomianism probably follows from the view
that all action is predestined in ways that abrogate the
ascription of moral responsibility to its agent. See
Basham, History and Doctrines of the Ajlvikas, p. 84.

This is the doctrine of non-causality (ahetukavdda) main-
tained by the Ajlvaka leader Makkhali Gosala, and called
in the SamaMaphala Sutta the doctrine of purification by
samsara ( samsamsuddhi , DN 2.21 /i.54). The philosophy of
Makkhali Gosala has been examined in detail by Basham,
History and Doctrines of the Ajivikas, Chapters 12 and 13. A
translation of the Digha commentary on this doctrine
will be found in Bodhi, Discourse on the Fruits of
Recluseship , pp. 70-77.

Niyati, destiny or fate, is the primary explanatory princi-
ple in Makkhali's philosophy, "circumstance and nature"
(sangatibhava) seem to be its modes of operation in exter-
nal events and in the constitution of the individual,
respectively. The six classes ( abhijati ) are six gradations of
human beings according to their level of spiritual devel-
opment, the highest being reserved for the three mentors
of the Ajlvakas mentioned at MN 36.5. On the six classes,
see Bodhi, Discourse on the Fruits of Recluseship, pp. 73-75.
Also, AN 6:57/iii.383-84.

This is a denial of the four immaterial planes of existence,
the objective counterparts of the four immaterial medita-
tive attainments.

These are the gods of the planes corresponding to the
four jhanas. They possess bodies of subtle matter, unlike
the gods of the immaterial planes who consist entirely of
mind without any admixture of matter.

MA: Even though the wise man discussed here has
doubts about the existence of the immaterial planes, he
attains the fourth jhana, and on the basis of that he
attempts to attain the immaterial absorptions. If he fails
he is certain of rebirth in the fine-material planes, but if he
succeeds he will be reborn in the immaterial planes. Thus
for him this wager is an "incontrovertible teaching."

MA: Cessation of being ( bhamnirodha ) here is Nibbana.
MA: Even though this person has doubts about the exis-
tence of Nibbana, he attains the eight meditative


Notes to Suttas 60-62 1263


attainments, and then, using one of those attainments as
a basis, he develops insight, thinking: "If there is cessa-
tion, then I will reach arahantship and attain Nibbana." If
he fails he is certain of rebirth in the immaterial planes,
but if he succeeds he reaches arahantship and attains
Nibbana.

SUITA 61

637 Rahula was the only son of the Buddha, bom on the day
his father left the palace to seek enlightenment. At the
age of seven he was ordained as a novice by Ven. Sari-
putta on the occasion of the Buddha's first return visit to
Kapilavatthu after his enlightenment. The Buddha
declared him the foremost disciple among those desirous
of training. According to MA, this discourse was taught
to Rahula when he was seven years old, thus very shortly
after his ordination. At MN 147 he attains arahantship
after listening to a discourse by the Buddha on the devel-
opment of insight.

638 To acknowledge a wrong deed as such, confess it, and
undertake restraint for the future leads to growth in the
discipline of the Noble One. See MN 65.13.

639 In this section, however, the phrase "then you should
confess such a bodily action... and laid it open" is
replaced by the following: "Then you should be
repelled, ashamed, and disgusted by that mental action.
Having become repelled, ashamed, and disgusted by
that mental action..." This substitution is made because
unwholesome thoughts, unlike bodily and verbal trans-
gressions, do not require confession as a means of exon-
eration. Both Horner in MLS and Nm in Ms missed this
variation.

SUITA 62

640 According to MA, this discourse was taught to Rahula
when he was eighteen years old, for the purpose of dis-
pelling desire connected with the household life. The
Shorter Discourse of Advice to Rahula is MN 147.


1264 The Majjhima Nikaya


641 MA: While Rahula was following the Buddha, he noted
with admiration the physical perfection of the Master
and reflected that he himself was of similar appearance,
thinking: "I too am handsome like my father the Blessed
One. The Buddha's form is beautiful and so too is mine."
The Buddha read Rahula's thought and decided to
admonish him at once, before such vain thoughts led him
into greater difficulties. Hence the Buddha framed his
advice in terms of contemplating the body as neither a
self nor the possession of a self.

642 MA: Ven. Sariputta, Rahula's teacher, gave Rahula this
advice unaware that he had already been given different
meditation instructions by the Buddha. He was misled
by Rahula's cross-legged posture into thinking that he
was practising mindfulness of breathing.

643 MA: The Buddha here explains the meditation on the
four great elements rather than mindfulness of breathing
in order to dispel Rahula's attachment to the body, which
had not yet been removed by the brief instruction on the
egolessness of material form. See n.329 for explanation of
terms requiring comment.

644 Space ( akfrsa ) is not a primary material element but is
classified under derivative material form {upttda rttpa).

645 MA: This passage (§13-17) is taught to show the quality
of impartiality (tadibhUva).

646 For explanations of unclear terms in this first tetrad on
mindfulness of breathing (§26), see nn.140-142. Terms
needing clarification in the following three tetrads will be
explained in the notes to MN 118, the AndpHnasati Sutta.

647 That is, the meditator dies calmly, with mindfulness and
awareness.

sutta 63

648 Those who have always wondered about the fate of the
monk who almost left the Buddha to satisfy his meta-
physical curiosity will be gladdened to know that in his
old age MalunkySputta received a brief discourse on the
six sense bases from the Buddha, went off into solitary


Notes to Sutta 64 1265


meditation, and attained arahantship. See SN 35:95/
iv.72-76. His verses are at Thag 399-404 and 794-817.

SUTTA 64

649 The five lower fetters ( orambMgiyani sariiyojanani) are so
called because they lead to rebirth in the sense-sphere
planes. They are eradicated in their entirety only by the
non-returner.

650 MA: The question may be raised: "When the Buddha had
asked about the fetters and the Elder replied in terms of
the fetters, why does the Buddha criticise his reply?" The
reason is that MalunkySputta held the view that a person
is fettered by the defilements only at times when they
assail him, while at other times he is not fettered by
them. The Buddha spoke as he did to show the error in
this view.

651 Anuseti tvev'assa sakkayaditthanusayo. On the anusayas or
underlying tendencies, see n.473. In the commentaries
the defilements are distinguished as occurring at three
levels: the anusaya level, where they remain as mere
latent dispositions in the mind; the pariyutthana level,
where they rise up to obsess and enslave the mind
(referred to in §5 of this discourse); and the vitikkama
level, where they motivate unwholesome bodily and ver-
bal action. The point of the Buddha's criticism is that the
fetters, even when they do not come to active manifesta-
tion, continue to exist at the anusaya level so long as they
have not been eradicated by the supramundane path.

652 Dhamma. This could also have been rendered "things."

653 MA: The fetter and the underlying tendency are in prin :
ciple not distinct things; rather, it is the same defilement
that is called a fetter in the sense of binding, and an
underlying tendency in the sense of being unabandoned.

654 Upadhiviveka. MA glosses upadhi here as the five cords of
sensual pleasure. Though the first three clauses of this
statement seem to express the same ideas as the two
more usual clauses that follow, MT indicates that they
are intended to show the means for becoming "quite


1266 The Majjhima Nikaya


secluded from sensual pleasures, secluded from
unwholesome states."

655 This passage shows the development of insight (vipassana)
upon a basis of serenity ( samatha ), using the jhana on
which the practice of insight is based as the object of
insight contemplation. See MN 52.4 and n.552. Here two
terms - impermanent and disintegrating - show the char-
acteristic of impermanence; three terms - alien, void, and
not self - show the characteristic of non-self; the remain-
ing six terms show the characteristic of suffering.

656 MA: He "turns his mind away" from the five aggregates
included within the jhana, which he has seen to be
stamped with the three characteristics. The "deathless
element" ( amata dhatu) is Nibbana. First "he directs his
mind to it" with the insight consciousness, having heard
it praised and described as "the peaceful and sublime,"
etc. Then, with the supramundane path, "he directs his
mind to it" by making it an object and penetrating it as
the peaceful and sublime, etc.

657 See n.553.

658 It should be noted that, when the immaterial attainments
are made the basis for insight contemplation, the aggre-
gate of material form is not included among the objects
of insight. Thus only the four immaterial aggregates are
mentioned here.

659 MA: Among those who proceed by way of serenity, one
bhikkhu emphasises unification of mind - he is said to
gain deliverance of mind; another emphasises wisdom -
he is said to gain deliverance by wisdom. Among those
who proceed by way of insight, one emphasises wisdom
- he is said to gain deliverance by wisdom; another
emphasises unification of mind - he is said to gain deliv-
erance of mind. The two chief disciples attained ara-
hantship by emphasising both serenity and insight, but
Ven. Sariputta became one who gained deliverance by
wisdom and Ven. Maha Moggallana became one who
gained deliverance of mind. Thus the reason (for the dif-
ferent designations) is the difference in their faculties,
i.e., between the predominance of the concentration fac-
ulty and of the wisdom faculty.


Notes to Sutta 65 \267


sutta 65

660 This refers to the Buddha's practice of eating a single
meal in the forenoon only. According to the Patimokkha,
the bhikkhus are prohibited from eating from noon until
the following dawn, though the single-session practice is
only recommended but not required.

661 MA: He would be worried and anxious whether he could
live the holy life for his entire life.

662 His anxiety persisted because he would still have to fin-
ish his meal of the remains by noon.

663 This is the rule prohibiting eating outside the proper time
limits. See Vin Pac 37/iv.35.

664 The seven terms used in this section represent a seven-
fold classification of noble individuals. They are expli-
cated at MN 70.14-21.

665 Both Nm and Homer take sankameyya here to mean that
the bhikkhu makes himself a plank, i.e., lies down across
the mud. This, however, is contradicted by Bhaddali's
negative answer. Thus it would seem more correct to
take this verb to mean that he crosses over himself (as the
verb literally does mean), in disregard of the Buddha's
injunction. MA points out that the Buddha would never
give such a command to his disciples, but only says this
to emphasise the recalcitrant behaviour of Bhaddali.

666 MA: He maintains himself by a measure of worldly faith
and worldly love towards his preceptor and teacher.
Because the other bhikkhus help him, he remains in the
homeless life and may eventually become a great monk
attained to the direct knowledges.

667 This passage refers to the fixed principle that the Buddhtl
does not lay down a training rule until a case arises that
requires the promulgation of an appropriate training
rule. See Vin Par l/iii.9— 10.

668 Tasmirh thane parinibbayati. The verb used here is the
verbal form of parinibbana, and could be literally,
though erroneously, translated, "He attains final
Nibbana in that action."

669 "One beyond training" ( asekha ) is an arahant. MA explains
these ten factors as constituents of the fruit of arahantship.


1268 The Majjhma Nikaya


670 Right knowledge ( samma hana) is the knowledge pertain-
ing to the fruit of arahantship, right deliverance (s amnia
vimutti) the arahant's liberation from all defilements.

sutta 66

671 From this passage and that to follow, it appears that the
Buddha restricted the allowable time for bhikkhus' meals
in two successive stages, first prohibiting only the after-
noon meal and allowing a night meal. However, in the
Vinaya account of the origin of Pac 37 (Vin iv.85) no
mention is made of this successive prohibition. To the
contrary, the text seems to assume that it is an item of
common knowledge that monks should not consume
food past noon, and it shows the Buddha laying down
the rule against untimely eating with one complete pro-
nouncement valid for all meals past noon.

672 The utterance is in what appears to be very colloquial
Pali. MA explains: If one's mother and father were alive,
they would give their son various kinds of food and offer
him a place to sleep, and thus he would not have to wan-
der about for food at night.

673 MA: The Buddha undertakes this teaching in order to
analyse the person who abandons what he is told to
abandon (§9) into four distinct types-of individuals.

674 Upadhi., MA glosses: For the abandoning of four kinds of
upadhi - the aggregates, defilements, volitional forma-
tions, and cords of sensual pleasure {khandh' upadhi
kiles'upadhi abhisankhar' upadhi kantagun' upadhi).

675 MA: The ordinary man, the stream-enterer, the once-
returner, and the non-returner can all be included under
the first category (§14), the non-returner becaqse the
craving for being still exists in him and thus at times he
can delight in thoughts of worldly enjoyment. The same
four can be included in the second category (§15), the
ordinary man because he may suppress arisen defile-
ments, arouse energy, develop insight, and eradicate
defilements by attaining the supramundane path.

676 This type is distinguished from the previous type only by
his sluggishness in arousing mindfulness to abandon
arisen defilements.


Notes to Suttas 66 and 67 1269


677 This is the arahant, who alone has eradicated all the fetters.

678 Here I have departed from Nm in rendering sukha as
"bliss" rather than "pleasure" in order to avoid the
awkward-sounding phrases that would result from strict
consistency. MA explains the jhanas as nekkhammasukha
because they yield the bliss of renouncing sensual plea-
sures; as pavivekasukha because they yield the bliss of
being secluded from the crowd and from defilements; as
upasamasukha because their bliss is for the purpose of
quieting down the defilements; and as sambodhasukha
because their bliss is for the purpose of attaining enlight-
enment. The jhanas themselves, of course, are not states
of enlightenment.

679 All states of mind below the fourth jhana are classified as
"the perturbable" ( injita ). The fourth jhana and all higher
states are called "the imperturbable" ( aninjita ). See n.1000.

680 MA: It is not fitting to become attached to it with craving,
and one should not come to a standstill at this point.

681 The cessation of perception and feeling is not simply one
more higher attainment along the scale of concentration,
but here implies the full development of insight brought
to its climax in arahantship.

SUTTA 67

682 Kevatta marine macchavilope. MA gives two explanations:
one favours this rendering, the other suggests "fisherman
hauling in fish."

683 It was the Brahma Sahampati who entreated the newly
enlightened Buddha to teach the Dhamma to the world.
See MN 26.20.

684 MA: In this case Ven. Sariputta erred in not recognising
his responsibility, for the Sangha is the responsibility of
the two great elders. Thus the Buddha rebuked him but
commended Ven. Moggallana, who recognised his
responsibility’.

685 MA: The Buddha undertook this teaching to show that
there are four fears (or dangers, bhaya) in his Dispen-
sation. Those who can overcome these four fears will
become established in the Dispensation, the others will
not become established.


1270 The Majjhima Nikaya


686 Pali uses two distinct words signifying different types of
food: khudaniya, "food to be consumed/' includes all vari-
eties of vegetables, nuts, fruits, yams, etc.; bhojamya, "food
to be eaten," includes food made of grain, meat, and fish.
Things to be tasted ( sayitabba ) would include light
refreshments.

687 The proper time is from dawn to noon, beyond which
only liquids may be drunk.

SUTTA 68

688 The "rapture and pleasure secluded from sensual pleasures"
signifies the first and second jhanas, "something more
peaceful than that" the higher jhanas and the four paths.

689 See MN 2.4. These are practices undertaken by one in
training to prevent the arising of latent taints that have not
yet been abandoned.

690 This refers to the Buddha's ability to discover by clairvoy-
ance the states in which his disciples have taken rebirth.

691 AnM : the knowledge attained by the arahant.

SUTTA 69

692 This is prohibited by Pac 46 (Vin iv.98-101). A bhikkhu
may visit families at these times only if he has informed
another bhikkhu in the monastery of his intentions, except
during the season for making and giving robes.

693 Abhidhamma abhivinaya. MA says that he should apply
himself to learning the text and commentary to the
Abhidhamma Pitaka and the Vinaya Pitaka. This is clearly
anachronistic. On Abhidhamma in the context of the sut-
tas, see n.362. Although there is no corresponding body of
literature called "Abhivinaya," it seems probable the word
refers to a systematic and analytical approach to the study
of the Vinaya, perhaps that embedded in the Sutta-
vibhanga of the Vinaya Pitaka.

694 MA: This refers to the eight meditative attainments. As a
minimum he should become proficient in the preliminary
work of one meditation subject, such as a kasina.


Notes to Suites 69 and 70 1271


695 MA: This refers to all the supramundane states. As a mini-
mum he should become proficient in one approach to
developing insight up to arahantship.

sutta 70

696 See n.671. In agreement with MN 66.6, MA explains that
the Buddha had first prohibited the afternoon meal and
then at a later time prohibited the night meal. He did this
out of concern for the delicate bhikkhus in the Order, since
they might have become fatigued too quickly if both late
meals were prohibited simultaneously.

697 In the Vinaya Pitaka, Assaji and Punabbasuka are
described as "unscrupulous and depraved" monks and
are shown indulging in various kinds of bad conduct that
bring about the corruption of the laity. At Kltagiri an act
of banishment was pronounced against them, and their
refusal to obey led to the promulgation of Sanghadisesa 13
(Vin iii. 179-84).

698 MA: This statement is made with pointed reference to
pleasure experienced in eating a night meal, which does
not conduce to the practice of a monk's duties.

699 MA: The former type of pleasant feeling is the joy based
on the household life, the latter the joy based on renuncia-
tion. Similarly, the next two sentences refer to the grief
and equanimity based, respectively, on the household life
and on renunciation. See MN 137.9-15.

700 §§8-10 serve to provide, by appeal to the Buddha's perfect
understanding, the grounds for his injunction to abandon
all feelings based on the household life and to develop the
feelings based on renunciation.

701 Here follows a sevenfold classification of noble individu-
als which categorises them not merely on the basis of their
path and fruit attainment - as the more familiar eightfold
scheme does - but according to their dominant faculty.
Alternative definitions of these seven are offered by
Pug 1:30-36/14-15.

702 Ubhatobhagavimutta. MA: He is "liberated-in-both-ways"
because he is liberated from the physical body by the


1272 The Majjhima Nikaya


immaterial attainments and from the mental body by the
path (of arahantship). The Pug definition reads: "He con-
tacts with the body and abides in the eight liberations,
and his taints are destroyed by his seeing with wisdom."
MA says that the ubhatobhagavimutta includes those who
attain arahantship after emerging from one or another of
the four immaterial attainments and the one who attains
it after emerging from the attainment of cessation.

703 Pahhdvimutta. MA: This includes those who attain ara-
hantship either as dry-insight meditators ( sukkha-vipassaka )
or after emerging from one or another of the four jhanas.
The Pug definition merely substitutes the eight liberations
for "those liberations. . .transcending forms."

704 Kayasakkhin. MA: This type includes the six individuals -
from the one established in the fruit of stream-entry up to
the one on the path of arahantship - who first contact the
(immaterial) jhanas and subsequently realise Nibbana.
MT stresses that one or another of the immaterial attain-
ments including cessation is needed to qualify as
kayasakkhin. The Pug definition merely substitutes the
eight liberations.

705 Ditthipatta. MA says that this type includes the same six
individuals included under kayasakkhin - from the
stream-enterer to the one on the path of arahantship -
but without possession of the immaterial attainments.
Pug defines him as one who has understood the Four
Noble Truths and who has reviewed and examined with
wisdom the teachings proclaimed by the Tathagata.

706 Saddhavimutta. MA says that this type too includes the
same six. Pug defines him in the same way as it defines
the ditthipatta, but adds that he has not reviewed and
examined the teachings with wisdom to the same extent
that the ditthipatta has.

707 MA says that this type, the dhammanusdrin, and the next,
the saddhanusarin, are individuals on the path of stream-
entry, the former with predominance of wisdom, the lat-
ter with predominance of faith. For more on these two
types, see n.273.

708 MA: With the mental body he realises Nibbana, the
ultimate truth, and he penetrates it with the wisdom
pertaining to the supramundane path.


Notes to Suites 70 and 71 1273


709 That is, these bhikkhus have not had the faith required to
undertake the training laid down for them by the
Buddha.

710 MA says that the "four-phrased statement" ( catuppadam
veyyakaramm) is the teaching of the Four Noble Truths.
However, no mention is made here of the four truths.

711 MA: By this the Buddha shows that the ideal disciple
practises by arousing his energy and resolving: "I shall
not rise up so long as I have not attained arahantship."

SUTTA 71

712 This sutta and the following two seem to present a
chronological account of Vacchagotta's spiritual evolu-
tion. The Samyutta Nikaya contains a whole section of
short discussions between the Buddha and Vacchagotta,
SN 33/iii.257-62. See also SN 44:7-1 l/iv.391-402.

713 This is the type of omniscience that the Jain teacher the
Nigantha Nataputta claims at MN 14.17.

714 MA explains that even though part of the statement is
valid, the Buddha rejects the entire statement because of
the portion that is invalid. The part of the statement that
is valid is the assertion that the Buddha is omniscient and
all-seeing; the part that is excessive is the assertion that
knowledge and vision are continuously present to him.
According to the Theravada tradition the Buddha is
omniscient in the sense that all knowable things are
potentially accessible to him. He cannot, however, know
everything simultaneously and must advert to whatever
he wishes to know. At MN 90.8 the Buddha says that it is
possible to know and see all, though not simultaneously,
and at AN 4:24/ii.24 he claims to know all that can be
seen, heard, sensed, and cognized, which is understood
by the Theravada tradition as an assertion of omniscience
in the qualified sense. See too in this connection
Miln 102-7.

715 MA explains "the fetter of householder ship" ( gihisatn -
yojana) as attachment to the requisites of a householder,
which MT details as land, ornaments, wealth, grain, etc.
MA says that even though the texts mention some indi-
viduals who attained arahantship as laymen, by the path


1274 The Majjhima Nikaya


of arahantship they destroyed all attachment to worldly
things and thus either went forth as monks or passed
away immediately after their attainment. The question of
lay arahants is discussed at Miln 264.

716 On the Ajlvakas see MN 5.5.

717 Since this Ajlvaka believed in the moral efficacy of action,
he could not have subscribed to the orthodox philosophi-
cal fatalism of the Ajlvakas, which denied the effective
role of kamma and volitional deeds in modifying human
destiny. MA identifies this Ajlvaka with the Bodhisatta in
a previous birth.

SUTTA 72

718 The view that the soul (jtva) and the body are the same is
materialism, which reduces the soul to the body. The fol-
lowing view that the soul and the body are different is an
etemalist view, which regards the soul as a persisting spiri-
tual principle that can exist independently of the body.

719 The view that a Tathagata exists after death is a form of
etemalism that regards the Tathagata, or spiritually per-
fect individual, as possessing a self that attains eternal
deliverance after the death of the body. The view that a
Tathagata does not exist after death also identifies the
Tathagata as self, but holds that this self is annihilated
upon the death of the body. The third view attempts a
synthesis of these two, which the Buddha rejects because
both components involve a wrong view. The fourth view
seems to be a sceptical attempt to reject both alternatives
or to avoid taking a definite stand.

720 In the Pali a word play is involved between ditthigata,
"speculative view," which the Tathagata has put away, and
dittha, what has been "seen" by the Tathagata with direct
vision, namely, the rise and fall of the five aggregates.

721 MA says that "does not reappear" actually does apply, i n
the sense that the arahant does not undergo a new exis-
tence. But if Vacchagotta were to hear this he would mis-
apprehend it as annihilationism, and thus the Buddha
denies that it applies in the sense that annihilation is not a
tenable position.


Motes to Sutffls 72 and 73 1275


722 MA says this is the material form by which one would
describe the Tathagata as a being (or self) possessing
material form. MT adds that the material form has been
abandoned by the abandonment of the fetters connected
with it, and it has thus become incapable of arising again
in the future.

723 This passage should be connected with the simile of the
extinguished fire. Just as the extinguished fire cannot be
described as having gone to any direction, so the
Tathagata who has attained to final Nibbana cannot be
described in terms of the four alternatives. The simile con-
cerns solely the legitimacy of conceptual and linguistic
usage and is not intended to suggest, as some scholars
have held, that the Tathagata attains to some mystical
absorption in the Absolute. The words "profound, immea-
surable, unfathomable" point to the transcendental
dimension of the liberation attained by the Accomplished
One, its inaccessibility to discursive thought.

SUTTA 73

724 This question and the next refer to arahantship, which
(according to MA) Vacchagotta thought may have been an
exclusive prerogative of the Buddha.

725 This question refers to the non-returner. Even though the
non-returner may remain in the lay life, he necessarily
observes celibacy because he has cut off the fetter of sen-
sual desire.

726 This question refers to the stream-enterer and the once-
returner, who may still indulge in sensual pleasures if
they remain in the lay life.

727 MA: He had attained the fruit of the non-returner and
came to ask the Buddha about the practice of insight for
attaining the path of arahantship. However, the Buddha
saw that he had the supporting conditions for the six
direct knowledges. Thus he taught him serenity for pro-
ducing the five mundane direct knowledges and insight
for reaching arahantship.

728 The suitable basis (ayatana) is the fourth jhana for the five
direct knowledges and insight for arahantship.


1276 The Majjhima Nikaya


729 Paricinno me Bhagava, paricinno me Sugato. This is an indi-
rect way of informing the Buddha of his attainment of
arahantship. The bhikkhus did not understand this, and
therefore the Buddha interprets its significance for them.


SUTTA 74

730 Dlghanakha was Ven. Sariputta's nephew. At the time he
approached the Buddha, Sariputta had been a bhikkhu
for only two weeks and was still a stream-enterer.

731 MA holds that Dlghanakha is an annihilationist ( ucche -
davadin) and explains this assertion to mean: "No [mode
of] rebirth is acceptable to me." However, the text itself
does not give any concrete evidence supporting this
interpretation. It seems much more likely that Digha-
nakha's statement, "Nothing is acceptable to me" (sabbarii
me na khamati), is intended to apply specifically to other
philosophical views, and thus shows Dlghanakha to be a
radical sceptic of the class satirically characterised at
MN 76.30 as "eel-wrigglers". His assertion would then be
tantamount to a wholesale repudiation of all philosophi-
cal views.

732 This exchange, as interpreted by MA and MT, should be
understood as follows: The Buddha suggests, by his
question, that Dlghanakha's assertion involves an inher-
ent contradiction. For he cannot reject everything with-
out also rejecting his own view, and this would entail the
opposite position, namely, that something is acceptable
to him. However, though Dlghanakha recognises the
implication of the Buddha's question, he continues to
insist on his view that nothing is acceptable to him.

733 MA says that the first sentence refers to those who first
take up a basic eternalist or annihilationist view and then
subsequently adopt secondary variations on that view;
the second sentence refers to those who abandon their
basic view without adopting an alternative. But if, as
seems plausible, Dlghanakha was a radical sceptic, then
the Buddha's statement might be understood to point to
an unsatisfactoriness inherent in the sceptic's position: it


Notes to Sutta 74 1277


is psychologically uncomfortable to insist on remaining
in the dark. Thus most sceptics, while professing a rejec-
tion of all views, surreptitiously adopt some definite
view, while a few abandon their scepticism to seek a path
to personal knowledge.

734 MA identifies the three views here as eternalism, annihi-
lationism, and partial eternalism. The etemalist view is
close to lust ( saragaya santike ), etc., because it affirms and
delights in existence in however sublimated a form;
annihilationism is close to non-lust, etc., because, though
involving a wrong conception of self, it leads to disen-
chantment with existence. If the second view is under-
stood as radical scepticism, it could also be seen as close
to non-lust in that it expresses disillusionment with the
attempt to buttress the attachment to existence with a
theoretical foundation and thus represents a tentative,
though mistaken, step in the direction of dispassion.

735 MA: This teaching is undertaken to show Dlghanakha
the danger in his view and thereby encourage him to
discard it.

736 MA: At this point Dlghanakha has discarded his annihi-
lationist view. Thus the Buddha now undertakes to teach
him insight meditation, first by way of the imperma-
nence of the body and then by way of the impermanence
of the mental factors under the heading of feeling.

737 MA quotes a verse that says that an arahant may use
the words "1" and "mine" without giving rise to conceit
or misconceiving them as referring to a self or ego
(SN l:5/i.l4). See too DN 9.53/i.202, where the Buddha
says of expressions employing the word "self": "These
are merely names, expressions, turns of speech, designa-
tions in common use in the world, which the Tathagata
uses without misapprehending them."

738 MA: Having reflected on the discourse spoken to his
nephew, Ven. Sariputta developed insight and attained
arahantship. Dlghanakha attained the fruit of stream-entry.

739 See nn.588-89.


I


1278 The Majjhima Nikaya

il


I

I';!!

I

i








SUTTA 75

740 Bhunahuno. In Ms, Nm had rendered this cryptic expres-
sion "a wrecker of being." I follow Homer in translating
after the commentarial gloss hatavaddhino mariyadakara-
kassa. MA explains that he held the view that "growth"
should be accomplished in the six senses by experiencing
whatever sense objects one has never experienced before
without clinging to those that are already familiar. His
view thus seems close to the contemporary attitude that
intensity and variety of experience is the ultimate good
and should be pursued without inhibitions or restric-
tions. The reason for his disapproval of the Buddha will
become clear in §8.

741 His father, the king, had provided him with three palaces
and the entourage of women in hopes of keeping him
confined to the lay life and distracting him from thoughts
of renunciation.

742 MA: This is said referring to the attainment of the fruit of
arahantship based on the fourth jhana.

743 The expression viparJtasanha alludes to the "perverted
perception" ( sanMvipallasa ) of perceiving pleasure in
what is really painful. MT says that sensual pleasures
are painful because they arouse the painful defilements
and because they yield painful fruits in the future.
Horner misses' the point by translating the line "(they
may) receive a change of sensation and think it pleas-
ant" (MLS 2:187).

744 Magandiya evidently understands the verse in line with
the fifty-eighth wrong view of the Brahmajala Sutta:
"When this self, furnished and supplied with the five
strands of sense pleasures, revels in them - at this point
the self attains supreme Nibbana here and now"
(DN 1.3.20/L36).

745 MA: The full verse had been recited by the previous
Buddhas seated in the midst of their fourfold assemblies.
The multitude learned it as "a verse concerned with the
good." After the last Buddha passed away, it spread
among the wanderers, who were able to preserve only
the first two lines in their books.


Notes to Suttas 75 and 76 1279


746 The emphatic yeva, "just," implies that he was clinging to
material form, feeling, etc., misconceived to be "I,"
"mine," and "my self." With the arising of vision - a
metaphorical expression for the path of stream-entry -
personality view is eradicated and he understands the
aggregates to be mere empty phenomena devoid of the
selfhood that he had earlier imputed to them.

747 "These" refers to the five aggregates.

sutta 76

748 TiraccMnakatM. Many translators render this expression
as "animal talk." However, tiracchana means literally
"going horizontally," and though this term is used as a
designation for animals, MA explains that in the present
context it means talk that goes "horizontally" or "perpen-
dicularly" to the path leading to heaven and liberation.

749 The "four ways that negate the living of the holy life"
0 abrahmacariyavasa , lit. "ways that are not living the holy
life") are teachings that in principle nullify the prospect
of attaining the ultimate fruits of spiritual discipline. As
the sutta will show, their proponents - inconsistently
with their own principles - did observe celibacy and
practise austerities. The "four kinds of holy life without
consolation" ( anassasikdni brahmacariyani ) do not under-
mine the principles of the holy life, but they also fail to
offer the prospect of attaining the ultimate fruits of spiri-
tual discipline.

750 The following passage makes explicit the materialist
premises of the nihilistic view already set forth at
MN 60.7. The Sdmafimphala Sutta ascribes this view to
Ajita Kesakambalin (DN 2.23/L55).

751 The point seems to be that even if one does not live the
holy life, one ultimately reaps the same rewards as one
who does, as the rest of the passage will make clear.

752 In the Samannaphala Sutta the view that follows, as far as
"the space between the seven bodies," is ascribed to
Pakudha Kaccayana (DN 2.26/i.56). However, in that
sutta the following passage on the elaborate system of
classifications, down to "fools and the wise both will



1280 The Majjhima Nikaya


make an end of suffering," is connected with the view of
non-causality and follows immediately upon the state-
ment of the doctrine of non-causality set forth in this
sutta at §13. The entire view is there assigned to
Makkhali Gosala. Since there are evident connections
between the non-causality doctrine and items in the sys-
tem of classifications (e.g., the reference to the "six class-
es"), and since both are known to have been typical of
the Ajlvaka movement headed by Makkhali Gosala, it
seems that the inclusion of this system of classifications
here under the doctrine of the seven bodies came about
through an error of oral transmission. The correct version
would thus be the one preserved by the Dlgha Nikaya.
For the commentary on the system of classification, see
Bodhi, The Discourse on the Fruits of Recluseship, pp. 72-77.

753 This statement reaffirms the fatalistic view of liberation
enunciated in §13.

754 This is the claim made by the Jain teacher the Nigantha
Nataputta at MN 14.17, and both the latter and Purana
Kassapa at AN 9:38/iv.428-29. The fact that he makes
bad judgements and must ask questions belies his claim
to omniscience.

755 MA: This position is called eel-wriggling ( amaravikkhepa )
because the doctrine roams about here and there, like an
eel diving in and out of the water, and thus it is impossible
to catch hold of*it. In the SUmahhaphala Sutta this position
is ascribed to Sanjaya Belatthiputta (DN 2.32/1.58-59). It is
quite possible that the "eel-wrigglers" were a class of rad-
ical sceptics who questioned the entire prospect of apod-
ictic knowledge about ultimate issues.

756 MA: He is incapable of storing up food provisions and
other pleasurable goods and subsequently enjoying them.

757 At DN 29.26/iii.l33 four other things that the arahant
cannot do are mentioned: he cannot take a wrong course
of action because of desire, hatred, fear, or delusion.

758 The translation of this passage follows the BBS ed.

759 Niyyataro: Nm had rendered this as "guides," Horner as
"great leaders." Evidently both followed PED, which
takes niyyatar to be an agent noun related to niyyama(ka),
pilot or helmsman. But niyyatar must be an agent noun of


Notes to Suttas 76 and 77 1281


the verb niyyati, "to go out (to final emancipation)," and
thus it has been rendered here as "emancipated one."

760 On these three mentors of the Ajlvakas, see MN 36.5 and
n.383. MA explains the phrase puttamatdya putta, "moth-
er's dead sons," thus: The idea occurred to him, "The
Ajlvakas are dead; their mother had dead sons."

SUTTA 77

761 Andgatam vadapatham. Nm had translated: "a future logi-
cal consequence of an assertion." The meaning seems to
be that the Buddha understands all the unexpressed
implications of his own doctrine as well as of his oppo-
nents' doctrines. The phrase may also imply that, in such
suttas as the Brahmajdla Sutta, the Buddha has laid down
a critique applicable to any doctrine that might arise in
the future course of religio-philosophical thought.

762 Explained in full in MN 10. The first seven groups of
"wholesome states" (§§15-21) constitute the thirty-seven
requisites of enlightenment (bodhipakkhiya dhamma).

763 Abhinndvosdnapdramippatta. MA explains as the attain-
ment of arahantship. This may be the only sense that the
word pdramT bears in its appearance in the four Nikayas.
In the later Theravada literature, beginning perhaps
with such works as the Buddhavamsa, this word comes
to signify the perfect virtues that a bodhisatta must fulfil
over many lives in order to attain Buddhahood. In that
context it corresponds to the pdramitd of the Mahayana
literature, though the numerical lists of virtues overlap
only in part.

764 MA explains liberation ( vimokkha ) here as meaning the
mind's full (but temporary) release from the opposing
states and its full (but temporary) release by delighting in
the object. The first liberation is the attainment of the
four jhanas using a kasina (see §24 and n.768) derived
from a coloured object in one's own body; the second is
the attainment of the jhanas using a kasina derived from
an external object; the third can be understood as the
attainment of the jhanas through either a very pure and
beautiful coloured kasina or the four brahmavihdras. The


1282 The Majjhirmi Nikaya


remaining liberations are the immaterial attainments and
the attainment of cessation.

765 MA explains that these are called bases of transcendence
(i abhibhayatana ) because they transcend ( abhibhavati , over-
come) the opposing states and the objects, the former
through the application of the appropriate antidote, the
latter through the arising of knowledge.

766 MA: The meditator does the preliminary work on an
internal form - e.g., the blue of the eyes for a blue-kasina,
the skin for a yellow kasina, the blood for a red-kasina,
the teeth for a white-kasina - but the sign of concentra-
tion ( nimitta ) arises externally. The "transcending" of the
forms is the attainment of absorption together with the
arising of the sign. The perception "I know, I see" is the
advertence ( abhoga ) that occurs after he emerges from the
attainment, not within the attainment. The second base of
transcendence differs from the first only by the extension
of the sign from limited to unlimited dimensions.

767 MA: The second and fourth bases involve preliminary
work done on an external form and the arising of the
sign externally. The fifth through eighth bases differ from
the third and fourth in the superior purity and lumin-
osity of their colours.

768 The kasina is a meditation object derived from a physical
device that provides a support for acquiring the inward-
ly visualised sign. Thus, for example, a disk made of clay
can be used as the preliminary object for practising the
earth-kasina, a bowl of water for practising the water-
kasina. The kasinas are explained in detail in Vsm IV and
V. There, however, the space-kasina is restricted to limit-
ed space, and the consciousness-kasina is replaced by the
light-kasina.

769 The similes for the jhanas also appear in MN 39, as do the
similes for the last three types of knowledge at §§34-36.

770 §§29-36 describe eight varieties of higher knowledge
which, in the Samanhaphala Sutta, are designated superior
fruits of recluseship.


Notes to Sutta 78 1283


sutta 78

771 MA: The park had been built by Queen Mallika, the wife
of King Pasenadi of Kosala, and beautified with flower
trees and fruit trees. At first only one hall was built,
which accounts for its name, but afterwards many halls
were built. Various companies of brahmins and wander-
ers would assemble here to expound and discuss their
doctrines.

772 MA: First the Buddha shows the plane of the arahant, the
one beyond training (i.e., by mentioning the ten quali-
ties), then he sets up an outline applicable to the sekha,
the disciple in higher training. The word rendered as
"habits" is sila, which in some contexts can assume a
wider range of meaning than "virtue."

773 MA explains that this refers to the fruit of stream-entry,
for it is at that point that the virtue of restraint by the
Patimokkha is fulfilled (and, for a lay Buddhist, the
observance of the Five Precepts). MA will also explain
the subsequent passages by reference to the other supra-
mundane paths and fruits. Although the text of the sutta
does not expressly mention these attainments, the com-
mentarial interpretation seems to be justified by the
expression "cease without remainder" ( aparisesa niruj-
jhanti), for it is only with the attainment of the respective
paths and fruits that a total cessation of the particular
defilement occurs. The commentary's view is further
supported by the culmination of the entire discourse in
the figure of the arahant.

774 MA: As far as the path of stream-entry he is said to be
practising for their cessation; when he has attained the
fruit of stream-entry they are said to have ceased.

775 This passage shows the arahant, who maintains virtuous
conduct but no longer identifies with his virtue by con-
ceiving it as "I" and "mine." Since his virtuous habits no
longer generate kamma, they are not describable as
"wholesome."

776 MA: As far as the path of arahantship he is said to be
practising for their cessation; when he has attained the
fruit of arahantship they are said to have ceased.




1284 The Majjhima Nikaya


MA: This refers to the first jhana pertaining to the fruit
of non-returning. The path of non-returning eradicates
sensual desire and ill will, and thus prevents any future
arising of the three unwholesome intentions - those of
sensual desire, ill will, and cruelty.

MA: As far as the path of non-returning he is said to be
practising for their cessation; when he has attained the
fruit of non-returning they are said to have ceased.

MA: This refers to the second jhana pertaining to the fruit
of arahantship.

MA: As far as the path of arahantship he is said to be
practising for their cessation; when he has obtained the
fruit of arahantship they are said to have ceased. The vir-
tuous intentions of the arahant are not described as
"wholesome."

See MN 65.34.


SUTTA 79


782 Seen.408.

783 Evamvanno atta hoti arogo param marana. The word arogo,
normally meaning healthy, here should be understood to
mean permanent. MA says that he speaks with reference
to rebirth in the heavenly world of Refulgent Glory, the
objective counterpart of the third jhaha, of which he has
heard without actually attaining it. His view would seem
to fall into the class described at MN 102.3.

784 Previous translators seem to have been perplexed by the
verb anassama. Thus Nm in Ms renders the line: "We
don't renounce our teachers' doctrines for this reason."
And Horner: "We have heard to here from our own
teachers." But anassama is a first-person plural aorist of
nassati, "to perish, to be lost." The same form occurs at
MN 27.7. MA explains that they knew that in the past
meditators would do the preparatory work on the kasina,
attain the third jhana, and be reborn in the world of
Refulgent Glory. But as time went on, the preparatory
work on the kasina was no longer understood and medi-
tators were not able to attain the third jhana. The wan-
derers only learned that "an entirely pleasant world


Notes to Suttas 79-81 1285


exists and that the five qualities mentioned at §21 were
the "practical way" to it. They knew of no entirely pleas-
ant world higher than the third jhana, and of no practical
way higher than the five qualities.

785 MA: Having attained the fourth jhana, by supernormal
power he goes to the world of Refulgent Glory and con-
verses with the deities there.

786 MA explains that in a previous life, as a monk during the
time of the Buddha Kassapa, he had persuaded another
monk to return to lay life in order to gain his robes and
bowl, and this obstructive kamma prevented him from
going forth under the Buddha in this life. But the Buddha
taught him two long suttas to provide him with a condi-
tion for future attainment. During the reign of King
Asoka he attained arahantship as the Elder Assagutta,
who excelled in the practice of loving-kindness.

SUTTA 80

787 MA identifies Vekhanassa as Sakuludayin's teacher.

788 MA: Even though he was a wanderer, he was keenly
intent on sensual pleasures. The Buddha undertook this
teaching in order to make him recognise his strong con-
cern with sensual pleasures, and thus the discourse
would be beneficial to him.

789 In the Pali this sentence takes the form of a riddle, and
the translation here is conjectural. MA explains that the
"pleasure higher than the sensual" (or "the highest sen-
sual pleasure," kamaggasukham) is Nibbana.

SUTTA 81

790 At the end of this sutta the Buddha will state that at that
time he himself was Jotipala. At SN l:50/i,35-36 the
deity Ghatikara visits the Buddha Gotama and recalls
their ancient friendship.

791 This seems to have been a common pejorative expression
used by the brahmin householders with reference to
those who led a full-time renunciate life, contrary to their
own ideal of maintaining the family lineage.


1286 The Majjhima Nikaya


792 In the East it is considered, under normal circumstances,
a serious breach of etiquette for one of lower birth to
touch one of superior birth on the head. MA explains that
Ghatikara was prepared to risk that breach in order to
persuade Jotipala to meet the Buddha.

793 MA states that bodhisattas go forth under the Buddhas,
purify their virtue, learn the Buddha's teachings, practise
the meditative life, and develop insight up to conformity
knowledge ( anulomaham ). But they do not make effort to
attain the paths and fruits (which would terminate their
bodhisatta career).

794 His conduct approximates as closely to that of a monk as
is possible for one still leading the household life. MA
explains that he does not trade in the pottery he makes
but merely engages in a free exchange of services with
his neighbours.

795 MA explains that he refused because of his fewness of
wishes ( appicchata ). He realised that the king had sent
the foodstuffs because he had heard the Buddha's report
about his own virtues, but he thought: "I have no need
of this. With what I acquire through my work I can sup-
port my parents and make offerings to the Buddha."

SUTTA 82

796 Because of his readiness to risk death in order to obtain
his parents' permission to go forth, he was later declared
by the Buddha the foremost of those gone forth in faith.
His verses are at Thag 769-93.

797 Although the stock phrase "before long" is used here,
MA says that it took Ratthapala twelve years of striving
to attain arahantship. This statement seems correct in
view of the fact that on his return journey to his parents'
home his father did not immediately recognise him.

798 Abhidosikam kummUsam. Elsewhere him translated
kummasa as "bread," but here it obviously means some-
thing of a semi-liquid nature. MA says it is made from
barley (yava).

799 MA explains that his father meant to say: "Ratthapala,
my dear, there is our wealth - we cannot be called poor -


Notes to Suttas 82 and 83 1287


yet you sit in such a place eating old porridge!"
However, the householder was afflicted with such sor-
row that he was unable to complete his utterance.

800 The verses obviously refer to his former wives, adorned
in order to entice him back to the lay life. Strangely, no
mention is made of the wives in the portion of the sutta
conceived in his pre-ordination days.

801 MA: Recalling the Elder, the king would speak praise of him
in the midst of his army or his harem: "That young man has
done a difficult thing - having abandoned great wealth, he
went forth without turning back or looking aside."

802 Upanlyati loko addhuvo. MA: It is swept away towards
ageing and death.

803 Attano loko anabhissaro. MA: There is no one able to offer
it shelter or to console it with a refuge. This statement, of
course, does not deny a refuge from the world, which is
just what the Dhamma offers.

804 Assako loko sabbath pahaya gamaniyam.

805 Uno loko atitto tanhadaso.

SUTTA 83

806 See Makhadeva Jataka (No. 9) and Nimi jdtaka (No. 54).
King Makhadeva and King Nimi were earlier births of
the Buddha Gotama.

807 The grove was originally planted by Makhadeva and
thus was still named after him.

808 MA: He was established in the ten wholesome coruses of
action.

809 The Uposatha is the religious observance day of ancient
India, also absorbed as such into Buddhism. See n.59.

810 According to Buddhist cosmology, the lifespan of human
beings oscillates between a minimum of ten years and a
maximum of many thousands of years. Makhadeva lived
at a time when the lifespan was at the long end of the
spectrum.

811 On the "divine messengers" - the foretokens of old age,
illness, and death - see MN 130.

812 MA: Matali led him first through the hells, then he
turned back and led him through the heavenly world.


1288 The Majjhima Nikaya


813 MA: The good practice is being broken by a virtuous
bhikkhu when he thinks, "I cannot obtain arahantship"
and does not exert energy. It has been broken by a cor-
rupt bhikkhu. It is being continued by the seven sekhas. It
has been continued by the arahant.

sutta 84

814 See n.230.

815 From this passage it seems that despite a tendency to
rigidification, the Indian class system was at the time
considerably more elastic than the later caste system that
evolved from it.

sutta 85

816 • Prince Bodhi was the son of King Udena of Kosambi; his

mother was the daughter of King Candappajjota of
Avantl. The portion of the sutta from §2 through §8 is
also found at Vin Cv Kh 5/ii.l27-29, where it leads to the
formulation of the rule mentioned in the following note.

817 MA explains that Prince Bodhi was childless and desired
a son. He had heard that people can fulfil their wishes by
making special offerings to the Buddha, so he spread the
white cloth with the idea: "If I am to have a son, the

t

Buddha will step on the cloth; if I am not to have a son,
he will not step on the cloth." The Buddha knew that by
reason of past evil kamma, he and his wife were destined
to remain childless. Hence he did not step on the cloth.
Later he laid down a disciplinary rule prohibiting the
bhikkhus from stepping on a white cloth, but subse-
quently modified the rule to allow bhikkhus to step on a
cloth as a blessing for householders.

818 Pacchimam janatam Tathagato apaloketi. The Vin version
here reads anukampati, "has compassion," which is
preferable. MA explains that Ven. Ananda said this with
the thought in mind: "In later times people will come to
regard honour to the bhikkhus as a way of ensuring the
fulfilment of their mundane wishes and will lose faith in


Notes to Suttas 85 and 86 1289


§

the Sangha if their displays of honour do not bring the
success they desire."

819 This is the basic tenet of the Jains, as at MN 14.20.

SUTTA 86

820 The name "Angulimala" is an epithet meaning "garland
{mala) of fingers ( anguli )." He was the son of the brahmin
Bhaggava, a chaplain to King Pasenadi of Kosala. His
given name was Ahimsaka, meaning "harmless one." He
studied at Takkasila, where he became his teacher's
favourite. His fellow students, jealous of him, told the
teacher that Ahimsaka had committed adultery with his
wife. The teacher, intent on bringing Ahimsaka to ruin,
commanded him to bring him a thousand human right-
hand fingers as an honorarium. Ahimsaka lived in the
Jalinl forest, attacking travellers, cutting off a finger of
each, and wearing them as a garland around his neck. At
the time the sutta opens he was one short of a thousand
and had made a determination to kill the next person to
come along. The Buddha saw that Angulimala's mother
was on her way to visit him, and aware that Angulimala
had the supporting conditions for arahantship, he inter-
cepted him shortly before his mother was due to arrive.

821 MA explains that Angulimala had just realised that the
monk before him was the Buddha himself and that he
had come to the forest for the express purpose of trans-
forming him.

822 MA: By virtue of his merit from past lives, Angulimala
acquired the bowl and robes through the spiritual power
of the Buddha as soon as the Buddha said, "Come,
bhikkhu."

823 Even today this utterance is often recited by Buddhist
monks as a protective charm {paritta) for pregnant
women close to their time of delivery.

824 MA explains that any volitional action ( kamma ) is capable
of yielding three kinds of result: a result to be experi-
enced here and now, i.e., in the same life in which the
deed is committed; a result to be experienced in the next


1290 The Majjhima Nikaya

existence; and a result to be experienced in any life sub-
sequent to the next, as long as one's sojourn in samsara
continues. Because he had attained arahantship,
Angulimala had escaped the latter two types of result but
not the first, since even arahants are susceptible to expe-
riencing the present-life results of actions they performed
before attaining arahantship.

825 Several of the verses to follow also appear in the
Dhammapada. Angulimala's verses are found in full at
Thag 866-91.

826 Although MA says that Ahimsaka, "Harmless," was
Angulimala's given name, the commentary to the
Theragatha says his original name was Himsaka, mean-
ing "dangerous."

827 Whereas virtuous bhikkhus short of arahants are said to
eat the country's almsfood as an inheritance from the
Buddha, the arahant eats "free from debt" because he has
made himself fully worthy of receiving alms. See Vsm I,
125-27.

SUTTA 87

828 The expression is often used to mean serious illness
and death.

829 Vidudabha was the king's son, who eventually over-
threw him. Kasi and Kosala are lands over which the
king ruled.

830 MA: He used this to wash his hands and feet and clean
his mouth before saluting the Buddha.

SUTTA 88

831 MA explains that the king asked this question with refer-
ence to the case involving the female wanderer Sundah,
which was pending investigation at the time. Wishing to
discredit the Buddha, some wandering ascetics persuaded
Sundarl to visit Jeta's Grove at night and then let herself be
seen returning at dawn, so people would become suspi-
cious. After some time they had her murdered and buried


Notes to Suttas 88 and 89 1291


near Jeta's Grove, and when her body was discovered
there, they pointed an accusing finger at the Buddha.
After a week the false report was exposed when the
king's spies found out the real story behind the murder.
See Ud 4:8/42-45.

832 Briefly, this passage offers five criteria of evil actions:
unwholesomeness underscores the psychological quality of
the action, its unhealthy effect upon the mind; its being
blameworthy underscores its morally detrimental nature;
its capacity to produce painful results calls attention to its
undesirable kammic potential; and the last statement
calls attention to both its evil motivation and the harmful
long-range consequences such action entails for both one-
self and others. The opposite explanation applies to good
action, discussed in §14.

833 MA: Ven. Ananda's answer goes beyond the question,
for he shows not only that the Buddha praises the aban-
doning of all unwholesome states, but that he acts in
accordance with his word by having abandoned all
unwholesome states as well.

834 MA explains the word bahitika, after which the sutta is
named, as a cloak produced in a foreign country.

SUTTA 89

835 Dlgha Karayana was the commander-in-chief of King
Pasenadi's forces. He was the nephew of Bandhula, chief
of the Mallas and a former friend of King Pasenadi,
whom the king had killed together with his thirty-two
sons through the treacherous contrivance of his corrupt
ministers. Karayana was in secret collusion with Prince
Vidudabha, Pasenadi's son, to help the latter usurp his
father's throne.

836 Three leagues ( yojana ) would be approximately twenty
miles.

837 MA says that he thought: "Previously, after conferring in
private with the recluse Gotama, the king arrested my
uncle and his thirty-two sons. Perhaps this time he will
arrest me." The royal insignia entrusted to Dlgha


1292 The Majjhima Nikaya


Karayana also included the fan, parasol, and sandals.
Dlgha Karayana hurried back to the capital with the
royal insignia and crowned Vidudabha king.

B38 At MN 13.11 these quarrels are said to arise because of
sensual pleasures.

839 As at MN 77.6.

840 As at MN 27.4-7.

841 At the time of their deaths both were declared by the
Buddha to be once-returners. See AN 6:44/ iii.348.

842 This statement indicates that this sutta can be assigned to
the last year of the Buddha's life.

843 When King Pasenadi returned to the place where he had
left Dlgha Karayana, he found only a servant woman
who reported the news to him. He then hurried on to
Rajagaha to enlist the aid of his nephew. King Ajatasattu.
But since he arrived late, he found the city gates closed.
Exhausted by the journey, he lay down in a hall outside
the city and died during the night.

844 MA: "Monuments to the Dhamma" means words
expressing reverence to the Dhamma. Whenever rever-
ence is shown towards any of the Three Jewels, it is also
shown to the others.

SUTTA 90

845 MA: These two listers are the king's wives (not his sisters!).

846 MA: There is no one who can know and see all - past,
present, and future - with one act of mental adverting,
with one act of consciousness; thus this problem is dis-
cussed in terms of a single act of consciousness ( ekacitta ).
On the question of the kind of omniscience the Thera-
vada tradition attributes to the Buddha, see n.714.

847 That is, he is not inquiring about their social status but
about their prospects for spiritual progress and attainment.

848 As at MN 85.58.

849 MA's explanation of this reply suggests that the former
class of gods are non-returners, while the latter dass are
gods who have not attained the status of non-returners.
The same would apply to the question on Brahmas in
§15. The two key terms that here distinguish the two


Notes to Suttas 90 and 91 1293


types of gods appear in the PTS ed. as savyapajjha and
abyapajjha, which would be rendered as "subject to ill
will" and "free from ill will," respectively. The BBS ed.
reading accepted here, sabyabajjha and abyabajjha, has the
support of MA, which glosses the former as "who have
not abandoned mental suffering by eradicating it," and
the latter as "who have eradicated suffering." As either
reading would be applicable to non-returners, no signifi-
cant difference is entailed. Note that the word itthatta,
which in the stock declaration of arahantship signifies
any state of manifest existence, is here glossed by MA as
manussaloka, the human world.

sutta 91

850 This is a stock description of a learned brahmin.
According to MA, the Three Vedas are the Iru, Yaju, and
Sama (= Rig, Yajur, and Saman). The fourth Veda, the
Atharva, is not mentioned, but MA says its existence is
implied when the histories (Itihasa) are called "the fifth,"
i.e., of the works regarded as authoritative by the brah-
mins. It is more likely, however, that the histories are
called "the fifth" in connection with the four branches of
study auxiliary to the Vedas that precede them in the
description. The translation of technical terms here fol-
lows MA, with the help of Monier-William's Sanskrit-
English Dictionary (Oxford, 1899). On the marks of a
Great Man, MA says that this was a science based on
12,000 works explaining the characteristics of great men,
such as Buddhas, paccekabuddhas, chief disciples, great
disciples, Wheel-turning Monarchs, etc. These works
included 16,000 verses called "The Buddha Mantra."

851 The thirty-two marks, enumerated in §9 below, are the
subject of an entire sutta in the Dlgha Nikaya, DN 30,
Lakkhana Sutta. There each of the marks is explained as the
kammic consequence of a particular virtue perfected by
the Buddha during his earlier existences as a bodhisatta.

852 The seven treasures are discussed in MN 129.34-41. The
acquisition of the wheel-treasure explains why he is
called a "Wheel-turning Monarch."


1294 The Majjhima Nikaya


853 MA: The world, enveloped in the darkness of the defile-
ments, is covered by seven veils: lust, hate, delusion, con-
ceit, views, ignorance, and immoral conduct. Having
removed these veils, the Buddha abides generating light
all around.

854 MA explains that the Buddha worked this feat after first
ascertaining that Uttara's teacher, Brahmayu, had the
potential for achieving the fruit of non-returning, and that
his attainment of this fruit depended upon the dispelling
of Uttara's doubts.

855 The seven are the backs of the four limbs, the two shoul-
ders, and the trunk.

856 Rasaggasaggt. The Lakkhana Sutta expands (DN 30.2.7/
iii.166): "Whatever he touches with the tip of his tongue
he tastes in his throat, and the taste is dispersed every-
where." It is difficult, however, to understand either how
this quality could be considered a physical characteristic
or how it could be perceived by others.

857 This mark, the unhTsa, accounts for the protuberance com-
monly seen on the top of the head of Buddha-images.

858 This is the standard reflection on the proper use of alms-
food, as at MN 2.14.

859 The blessing ( anumodana ) is a short talk following the
meal, instructing the donors in some aspect of the
Dhamma and expressing the wish that their meritorious
kamma.will bring them abundant fruit.

860 MA: This is the intention: "The excellent qualities I have
not described are far more numerous than those I have
described. The excellent qualities of Master Gotama are
like the great earth and the great ocean; expounded in
detail they are infinite and immeasurable, like space."

861 The Pali word for the tongue, jivha, is of the feminine
gender.

862 What must be directly known ( abhihheyya ) are the Four
Noble Truths, what must be developed ( bhavetabba ) is the
Noble Eightfold Path, and what must be abandoned
(pahatabba) are the defilements headed by craving. Here
the context requires that the word "Buddha" be under-
stood in the specific sense of a Fully Enlightened One
(sammasambuddha).


Notes to Suttas 91-93 1295


863 VedagU. This term and the following two - tevijja and sot-
thiya - seem to have represented ideal types among the
brahmins; see too MN 39.24, 26, and 27. The sixth and
seventh terms - kemlt and muni - were probably ideal
types among the non-Vedic ascetic orders. By his reply,
the Buddha endows these terms with new meanings
derived from his own spiritual system.

864 Here and in the reply the word "Buddha" may signify
simply one who is enlightened or awakened, in a sense
applicable to any arahant, though Brahmayu's response
also suggests it may be intended in the narrower sense of
a Fully Enlightened One.

865 MA offers an involved explanation of how the Buddha's
reply answers all eight of Brahmayu's questions.

866 As at MN 56.18.

SUTTA 92

867 The text of this sutta has not been included in the PTS ed.
of the Majjhima Nikaya, as it is identical with the sutta of
the same name in the Sutta Nipata, published in two dif-
ferent versions by the PTS. The bracketed page numbers
here therefore refer to the more recent PTS ed. of Sn, that
edited by Dines Anderson and Helmer Smith.

868 That is, Jambudlpa, the Indian subcontinent.

SUTTA 93

869 The argument in favour of this thesis is set forth at
MN 90.10-12.

870 MA: They speak thus intending to say: "Having studied
the Three Vedas, you have trained in the mantras by
which those who go forth undertake their going forth
and the mantras they maintain after they have gone
forth. You have practised their mode of conduct. There-
fore, you will not be defeated. Victory will be yours."

871 This statement is intended to show that brahmins are
born of women, just like other human beings, and there
is thus no substance to their claim that they are bom of
Brahma's mouth.


1296 The Majjhima Nikaya

872 Yona is probably the Pali equivalent of Ionia, the refer-
ence being to the Bactrian Greeks. Kamboja is a district in
India to the north of the Middle Country.

873 The argument of §§7-8 here is substantially identical
with that of MN 84.

874 MA identifies Devala the Dark, Asita Devala, with the
Buddha in an earlier life. The Buddha undertakes this
teaching to show: "In the past, when you were of a supe-
rior birth and I was of an inferior birth, you could not
answer a question I asked you about an assertion con-
cerning birth. So how can you do so now, when you are
inferior and I have become a Buddha?"

875 As in MN 38.26.

876 MA: Purina was the name of a servant of the seven seers;
he would take a spoon, cook leaves, and serve them.

SUTTA 94

877 MA: He did this after recognising that a lengthy discus-
sion would be required.

878 The kahapana was the principal monetary unit of the time.

879 During the Buddha's last days, this city was still a small
town known as Pataligama. At DN 16.1.28/iii.87, the
Buddha predicts its future greatness. It eventually
became the capital of Magadha. Its present-day descen-
ded is the city .of Patna, capital of the state of Bihar.


SUTTA 95


The opening passage of this sutta, down to §10, is virtually
identical with the opening of the Sonadanda Sutta (DN 4).
MA: It was called thus because offerings were made
there to the gods.

Another wealthy brahmin who resided in Ukkattha, a
crown property given to him by King Pasenadi. At
DN 2.21/i.llO he hears a discourse from the Buddha,
attains stream-entry, and goes for refuge along with lus
family and retinue.

These are the ancient rishis whom the brahmins regarded
as the divinely inspired authors of the Vedic hymns.


Nates to Suttas 95 and 96 1297


884 In Pali: saddha, ruci, anussava, dkdraparivitakka, ditthi-
nijjhSnakkhanti. Of these five grounds for arriving at a
conviction, the first two seem to be primarily emotive,
the third to be a blind acceptance of tradition, and the
last two primarily rational or cognitive. The "two differ-
ent ways" each may turn out are true and false.

885 It is not proper for him to come to this conclusion
because he has not personally ascertained the truth of his
conviction but only accepts it on a ground that is not
capable of yielding certainty.

886 Saccftnurakkhana: or, the safeguarding of truth, the protec-
tion of truth.

887 Saccdnubodha : or, the awakening to truth.

888 The procedure for the discovery of truth recommended
in this sutta appears to be an elaboration of the approach
described in MN 47.

889 Tuleti. MA; He investigates things in terms of imperma-
nence, and so forth. This stage thus seems to be that of
insight contemplation.

890 Although applying the will ( ussahati ) appears similar to
striving ( padahati ), the former may be understood as the
exertion undertaken prior to insight contemplation, the
latter as the exertion that brings insight up to the level of
the supramundane path.

891 MA: He realises Nibbana with the mental body (of the
path of stream-entry), and having penetrated the defile-
ments, he sees Nibbana with wisdom, making it clear
and evident.

892 While the discovery of truth in this context appears to
signify the attainment of stream-entry, the final arrival at
truth ( saccanuppatti ) seems to mean the full attainment of
arahantship.

893 See n.524.

SUTTA 96

894 MA: It had been an ancient practice among the brahmins to
wander for alms even when they possessed great wealth.

895 Although agriculture may seem a strange occupation for
one described as a merchant, it should be understood that




1298 The Majjhima Nikaya


the vessas not only ran the urban business enterprises, but
also owned and supervised agrarian undertakings.

896 Ariyarh kho aham brahmana lokuttaram dhammam purisassa
sandhanam pahhapemi.

897 Attabhavassa abhinibbatti : literally, "wherever the recon-
ception of his individuality takes place."


SUTTA 97

898 Sati uttarakaraniye. Ven. Sariputta had left without giving
him a teaching that would have enabled him to arrive at
the supramundane path and become fixed in destination
for enlightenment. Compared to this even rebirth in the
Brahma- world is described as "inferior" ( hina ).

899 This remark has the force of a gentle reproach. The
Buddha must have seen that Dhananjani had the poten-
tial to attain the supramundane path, since elsewhere
(e.g., MN 99.24-27) he himself teaches only the way to the
Brahma-world when that potential is lacking in his listener.

SUTTA 98

900 The text of this sutta has not been included in the PTS ed.
of the Majjhima Nikaya, for the same reason given in
n.867. The bracketed page numbers refer to the
Anderson-Smith ed. of Sn.

901 Here the word "kamma" has to be understood as present
action or deed, and not past action producing its present
consequences.

902 Samahha. MA: Among animals the diversity in the shape
of their bodily parts is determined by their species (yoni ),
but that (species differentiation) is not found in the indi-
vidual bodies of brahmins and other classes of humans.
Such being the case, the distinction between brahmins,
khattiyas, etc., is purely a verbal designation; it is spoken
of as mere conventional expression.

903 MA: Up to this point the Buddha has criticised the asser-
tion of Bharadvaja that birth makes one a brahmin. Now


1


Notes to Suttas 98 and 99 1299

he will uphold the assertion of Vasettha that action makes
one a brahmin. For the ancient brahmins and other wise
ones in the world would not recognise the brahminhood
of one defective in livelihood, virtue, and conduct.

904 Bhovadi. Bho, "sir," was a mode of address used among
the brahmins. From this point on the Buddha will identify
the true brahmin with the arahant. Verses 27-54 here are
identical with Dhp 396-423, except for an additional
couplet in Dhp 423.

905 MA: By the present volitional action which accomplishes
the work of farming, etc.

906 With this verse the word "kamma" undergoes a shift in
meaning signalled by the term "dependent origination."
"Kamma" here no longer means simply present action
determining one's social status, but action in the special
sense of a force binding beings to the round of existence.
This same line of thought becomes even clearer in the
next verse.

907 This verse and the following one again refer to the ara-
hant. Flere, however, the contrast is not between the ara-
hant as the one made holy by his actions and the born
brahmin unworthy of his designation, but between the
arahant as the one liberated from the bondage of action
and result and all other beings who remain tied by their
actions to the wheel of birth and death.

SUITA 99

908 Todeyya was a wealthy brahmin, the overlord of
Tudigama, a village near Savatthl. MN 135 was also spo-
ken to this same Subha.

909 Vibhajjavado kho aham ettha. Such statements account for
the later designation of Buddhism as vibhajjavada, "the
doctrine of analysis."

910 Obviously at the time trade was still in an early stage of
development. The same statement could hardly be
made today!

911 As at MN 95.13.

912 This statement must have been made before Pokkhara-


1300 The Majjhima Nikaya


sati became a follower of the Buddha, as is mentioned at
MN 95.9.

913 Anukampajatika.

914 This knowledge pertains to the third of the Tathagata's
powers, knowing the ways to all destinations. See
MN 12.12.

915 MA explains limiting action ( pamanakatam kammarii) as
kamma pertaining to the sense sphere ( kamavacara ). It is
contrasted with a limitless or immeasurable action,
namely, the jhanas pertaining to the fine-material sphere
or the immaterial sphere. In this case the brahmaviharas
developed to the jhanic level are intended. When a jhana
pertaining to the fine-material sphere or the immaterial
sphere is attained and mastered, a kamma pertaining to
the sense sphere cannot overpower it and gain the oppor-
tunity to yield its own result. Rather, the kamma pertain-
ing to the fine-material sphere or the immaterial sphere
overpowers the sense-sphere kammas and produces its
results. Obstructing the result of the sense-sphere kam-
mas, the brahmavihara that has been mastered leads to
rebirth in the company of Brahma.

916 As at MN 27.2

SUTTA 100

917 Dhananjam was a stream-enterer. MA says that Sangarava
was her husband's younger brother.

918 Ditthadhammabhinnavosanaparamippatta adibrahmacariyam
patijananti. MA glosses: They claim to be the originators,
creators, producers of a holy life, saying: "Having direct-
ly known here and now in this present existence and
having reached the consummation, we have attained
Nibbana, called 'perfection' because it is the transcen-
dence of everything."

919 It is puzzling that the reasoners and investigators ( takkl ,
vimamst) are here said to rely on the basis of mere faith
(saddhamattakena). Elsewhere faith and reasoning are con-
trasted as two different grounds of conviction (MN 95.14),
and "mere faith" seems more closely allied with reliance
on oral tradition than with reasoning and investigation.


Notes to Suttas 100 and 101 1301


920 Samam yeva dhammam abhifindya. This phrase emphasises
direct personal realisation as the foundation for promul-
gating a holy life.

921 MA says that Sangarava had the idea that the Buddha
spoke thus without actual knowledge, and he therefore
accuses the Buddha of false speech. The sequence of
ideas in this passage is difficult to follow and it is likely
that the text is corrupt.

sutta 101

922 This doctrine, which is here ascribed to the Jains, is also
taken up for criticism by the Buddha at SN 36:21/
iv.230-31 and AN 3:61/i.l73-74. The Buddha's teaching
recognises the existence of feeling that is not the result of
past action but a concomitant of present action, and also
admits feeling that is neither kammically active nor kam-
mic result.

923 From here until §5, "That being so...," also at
MN 14.17-19. The statement of the Nigantha Nataputta,
which at MN 14.17 introduces the Niganthas' position,
here comes afterwards, at §10, as the Niganthas' justifica-
tion for their assertion.

924 As at MN 95.14.

925 It is not fitting for them to make that declaration because
their "intense exertion," i.e., their ascetic practice, is the
cause for their painful feelings, as the Buddha states in §15.

926 This is a technical expression for an action that is to ripen
in this present life.

927 MA: "An action [whose result] is to be experienced in a
matured [personality]" is a synonym for an action
[whose result] is to be experienced here and now. "An
action [whose result] is to be experienced in an unma-
tured personality" is a synonym for action [whose
result] is to be experienced in the next life. But a specifi-
cation is made as follows: any action that yields its
result in the same life is one to be experienced here and
now, but only an action that produces its result within
seven days is called one to be experienced in a matured
personality.


1302 The Majjhima Nikaya


928 This is an action that does not gain the opportunity to
yield its result and thereby becomes defunct.

929 Issaranimmanahetu. This doctrine of the theists is criticised
by the Buddha at AN 3:61/i.l74.

930 Sangatibhdvahetu. This alludes to the doctrine of Makkhali
Gosala, criticised at length at MN 60.21 and AN 3:61/
i.175.

931 Abhijatihetu. This also refers to a tenet of Makkhali Gosala.

932 This is a formulation of the Buddha's Middle Way, which
avoids the extreme of self-mortification without falling into
the other extreme of infatuation with sensual pleasure.

933 MA explains the source of suffering to be craving, so
called because it is the root of the suffering comprised in
the five aggregates. The passage shows two alternative
approaches toward overcoming craving - one employing
energetic striving, the other detached equanimity. The
"fading away" of the source is identified by MA with the
supramundane path. The passage is said to illustrate the
practice of one who progresses on a pleasant path with
quick direct knowledge (s ukhapatipada khippdbhihM).

934 This passage is brought forth to show the Buddha's rea-
son for permitting his monks to undertake the ascetic
practices ( dhutanga ): the moderate use of austerities is
conductive to overcoming the defilements. But they are
not undertaken to wear away old kamma and to purify
the soul, as the Jains and other ascetic sects believed. MA
says that this passage illustrates the practice of one who
progresses on a difficult path with sluggish direct knowl-
edge ( dukkhapatipada dandhabhihha).

sutta 102

935 This sutta is a "middle length" counterpart of the longer
Brahmajala Sutta, included in the Dlgha Nikaya and pub-
lished in translation with its commentaries in Bodhi,
Discourse on the All-Embracing Net of Views. Detailed
explanations for almost all the views mentioned in this
sutta will be found in the Introduction and Part Two of
that work.

936 Aroga, "healthy," explained by MA as meaning permanent.


Notes to Sutta 102 1303


937 In the Brahmajala Sutta sixteen varieties of this view are
mentioned, the eight given here and two other tetrads:
the self as finite, infinite, both, and neither; and the self as
experiencing exclusively pleasure, exclusively pain, a
mixture of both, and neither. In the present sutta these
two tetrads are incorporated under speculations about
the past in §14.

938 Evidently, in the above list the views of the self as imma-
terial, percipient of unity, and percipient of the immea-
surable are based on attainment of the base of infinite
space. MT explains the consciousness-kasina as the base
of infinite consciousness, stating that these theorists
declare that base to be the self.

939 The perception within the third immaterial meditation -
the base of nothingness - is the subtlest and most refined
of all mundane perceptions. Although there is still a kind
of perception in the fourth immaterial attainment, it is so
subtle that it is considered no longer appropriate to des-
ignate it perception.

940 MA paraphrases thus: "All those types of perceptions
together with the views are conditioned, and because
they are conditioned, they are gross. But there is
Nibbana, called the cessation of formations, that is, of the
conditioned. Having known 'There is this/ that there is
Nibbana, seeing the escape from the conditioned, the
Tathagata has gone beyond the conditioned."

941 The second tetrad of §3 is dropped here since the self is
conceived as non-percipient. In the Brahmajala Sutta eight
varieties of this view are mentioned, these four plus the
finite-infinite tetrad.

942 MA points out that this statement is made with reference
to those planes of existence where all five aggregates
exist. In the immaterial planes consciousness occurs
without the aggregate of material form, and in the non-
percipient plane there is material form without con-
sciousness. But consciousness never occurs without the
three other mental aggregates.

943 The Brahmajala Sutta mentions eight varieties of this
view, these four plus the finite-infinite tetrad.

944 Sammoha, here obviously having a different meaning


1304 The Majjhima Nikaya


than the usual "confusion" or "delusion."

945 MA explains the compound ditthasutamutavihhatabba as
meaning "what is to be cognized as the seen, heard, and
sensed" and takes it to refer to sense-door cognitions.
However, it can also comprise all grosser mind-door cog-
nitions as well. To enter the fourth immaterial attain-
ment, all the ordinary "mental formations" involved in
other cognitive processes must be overcome, for their
persistence is an obstacle to entering this attainment.
Hence it is called "not percipient" (n'eva sahht).

946 Sasankharavasesasamdpatti. Within the fourth immaterial
attainment a residue of extremely subtle mental forma-
tions remains. Hence it is called "not non-percipient"
{nasahm).

947 The Brahmajala explains seven types of annihilationism,
here all collected together as one.

948 The "fear and disgust with personality" is an aspect of
vibhavatanha, the craving for non-existence. The annihila-
tionist view to which it gives rise still involves an identifi-
cation of personality with self - a self that is annihilated at
death - and thus, despite his denial, it binds the theorist
to the round of existence.

949 So far only four of the original five classes of speculations
about the future have been analysed, yet the Buddha
speaks as if they were all explicated. MA tries to resolve
the problem by explaining that assertions of "Nibbana
here and now" were comprised by the terms "percipient
of unity" and "percipient of diversity" in §3. This expla-
nation, however, is not convincing. Nm, in Ms, had
added the heading "Nibbana Here and Now" over §17,
and §§17-21 do seem to correspond with the last four of
the five doctrines of Nibbana here and now in the
Brahmajala. However, this interpretation seems contra-
dicted by §13 and by the phrase used in §17, §19 and §21,
"with the relinquishing of views about the past and the
future," which would exclude the doctrines of Nibbana
here and now. The problem seems insoluble, and raises
the question whether a passage on Nibbana here and
now was not lost in the course of the sutta's oral trans-
mission. In the Brahmajala the five doctrines are the asser-


Notes to Sutta 102 1305


tion of sensual pleasures and the four jhanas to be the
self's attainment of supreme Nibbana here and now.

950 This view includes all four of the etemalists who specu-
late about the past mentioned in the Brahmajala.

951 Since this is a view referring to the past, it may be taken
to imply that the self and the world arose spontaneously
out of nothing at some point in the past. Thus it would
comprise the two doctrines of fortuitous origination of
the Brahmajala, as MA maintains.

952 This includes the four types of partial etemalism.

953 This may include the four types of endless equivocation
or "eel-wriggling" of the Brahmajala.

954 Views 5-8 correspond exactly to the four extensionists of
the Brahmajala.

955 The eight views (9-16) are, in the Brahmajala, included
among the doctrines of percipient immortality comprised
under speculations about the future.

956 That is, they must accept their doctrine on some ground
other than knowledge, one involving belief or reasoning.
At MN 95.14, it is said that these five grounds of convic-
tion yield conclusions that can turn out to be either true
or false.

957 MA: That is not really knowledge but wrong understand-
ing; thus it is declared to be clinging to views.

958 MA says that at this point all sixty-two of the views set
forth in the Brahmajala Sutta have been incorporated,
yet this sutta has an even wider range since it includes
an exposition of personality view (most notably implied
by §24).

959 This section title, and the following Roman numeral "V",
were inserted by Nm on the supposition that this passage
presents the doctrines of Nibbana here and now, men-
tioned but not explicated earlier. However, as pointed
out in n.949, while the text of this passage lends some
support to that supposition, there are also cogent reasons
against it. Unfortunately, Ms contains no note by Nm
dealing with the problem of sequence in this sutta.

960 MA: This section is intended to show how all sixty-two
speculative views arise predominated over by person-
ality view.



1306 The Majjhima Nikaya


961 Pavivekam pttim. This refers to the first two jhanas, which
include piti.

962 MA explains that this is the grief caused by the loss of
the jhana. The grief does not arise immediately upon the
cessation of the jhana, but only after reflection upon its
disappearance.

963 Niramisam sukham. This is the pleasure of the third jhana.

964 The fourth jhana.

965 Santo'ham asmi, nibbuto'ham asmi, anupadano'ham asmi. In
the Pali the expression aham asmi, "l am," reveals that he is
still involved with clinging, as the Buddha will point out.

966 MA takes this to be an allusion to personality view. Thus
he is still clinging to a view.

967 MA states that elsewhere the expression "liberation
through not clinging" ( anupada vimokkha) signifies
Nibbana, but here it means the attainment of the fruit of
arahantship.

968 The Brahmajala Sutta too points to the understanding of
the origination, etc., of the six bases of contact as the way
to transcend all views.

SUTTA 103

969 Bhavabhavahetu. MA: "Do you think that he teaches the
Dhamma as a means of gaining merit so that he can expe-
rience happiness in this or that [higher] state of being?"

970 Abhidhamma. MA says that this refers to the thirty-seven
requisites of enlightenment mentioned in the previous
paragraph. See n.362.

971 Meaning ( attha ) and phrasing ( byanjana ) are the two
aspects of the Dhamma taught by the Buddha. The fol-
lowing passage, §§5-8, should be compared with
DN 29.18-21 /iii.128— 29, which also expresses a concern
for the preservation of the correct meaning and phrasing
of the Dhamma.

972 This statement is made because slight deviations from
the correct phrasing are not necessarily an obstacle to a
proper understanding of the meaning. But elsewhere
(e.g., AN 2:20 /i.59) the Buddha points out that the wrong
expression of the letter and the wrong interpretation of



Notes to Suttas 103 and 104 1307


the meaning are two factors responsible for the distortion
and disappearance of the true Dhamma.

973 The general principle underlying §§10-14 is this: If the
offending bhikkhu can be rehabilitated, then despite the
hurt to him and the trouble to oneself, one should try to
correct him. But if he is not susceptible to being rehabili-
tated, one should just maintain one's own equanimity.

974 "The Recluse" ( samana ) is glossed by MA with satthd, the
Teacher, referring to the Buddha. A similar use of the
term is found at MN 105.18, 21.

975 The "thing" ( dhamma ) intended, MA says, is quarrelling.

SUITA 104

976 The opening of this sutta is the same as that of DN 29,
which is also concerned with preserving harmony in the
Sangha after the Buddha's demise.

977 MA: The "shrine" and "refuge" are the Nigantha
Nataputta, who is now dead.

978 The novice Cunda was the younger brother of Ven.
Sariputta.

979 Even while the Buddha was still alive such a dispute had
already broken out among the bhikkhus at Kosambi,
referred to at MN 48.2.

980 This would be a dispute about the Noble Eightfold Path
or the other requisites of enlightenment.

981 The first four pairs are included among the "imperfec-
tions that defile the mind" at MN 7.3.

982 Adhikarana. Homer translates "legal questions." They are
dealt with at length at Vin Cv Kh 4/Vin ii.88-93; see
Homer, Book of the Discipline, 5:117-25. Briefly, litigation
because of a dispute ( vivadadhikarana ) arises when
bhikkhus dispute about the Dhamma and the Discipline;
litigation because of an accusation ( anuvadadhikarana )
when bhikkhus accuse a bhikkhu of committing a trans-
gression of the monastic rules; litigation because of an
offence ( dpattadhikarana ) when a bhikkhu who has com-
mitted a transgression seeks to exonerate himself from it;
and litigation concerning procedures ( kiccadhikarana )
deals with the enactment of the formal functions of the


1308 The Majjhima Nikaya


Sangha.

983 Adhikarcniasamatha. They are dealt with in detail in Vin
Cv Kh 4. How the seven means of settlement are to be
applied for the resolution of the four kinds of litigation is
discussed at Vin ii. 93-104; see Horner, Book of the
Discipline, 5.T25-40.

984 Sammukhavinaya. Horner translates "verdict in the pres-
ence of." At Vin ii.93, this is explained as confrontation
with (or presence of) the Sangha, the Dhamma, the
Discipline, and the individuals who are parties to the dis-
pute. This kind of settlement applies to all four kinds of
litigation, with minor differences in formulation.

985 Dhammanetti samanumajjitabba. MA gives as an example
of dhammanetti the ten courses of wholesome and
unwholesome conduct, but says that here the Dhamma
and Discipline themselves are meant.

986 Sativinaya. Horner renders "verdict of innocence". At
Vin ii.80, it is said that this is given when a bhikkhu is
pure and without offences and he is reproached with an
offence; he must ask the Sangha to give him such a ver-
dict by appeal to his full and accurate recollection of his
behaviour.

987 An offence involving defeat, a parajika offence, requires
expulsion from the Sangha. An offence bordering on
defeat is either a sanghadisesa offence, which requires a
formal meeting of the Sangha and a period of temporary
penalisation, or the preliminary steps leading to a parajika
offence.

988 AmUlhavinaya. A verdict of past insanity is given when a
bhikkhu commits offences during a period of madness.
The criterion for determining insanity is that he must
have no recollection of his behaviour during the period
for which the verdict is requested.

989 The procedure described is the established method by
which a bhikkhu obtains exoneration for his transgres-
sion when he has fallen into any offence that can be
cleared by confession.

990 Papiyyasika. Homer renders "decision for specific deprav-
ity." This verdict is pronounced against a bhikkhu who is
a maker of strife and quarrels in the Sangha, who is igno-


Notes to Suttas 104 and 105 1309


rant and full of offences, or who lives in unbecoming
association with householders.

991 Tinavattharaka. This means of settlement is resorted to
when the Sangha has been involved in a dispute in the
course of which the bhikkhus committed many minor
offences. Since to pursue charges for these offences
might prolong the conflict, the offences are cleared by
the means described in the sutta. MA explains that this
method is like throwing grass over excrement to
remove the bad smell, hence the name "covering over
with grass."

992 Offences calling for serious censure are those of the
parajika and sanghadisesa classes. Those connected with
the laity are cases where a bhikkhu reviles and dispar-
ages householders.

993 As at MN 48.6.

994 At MN 21.21, this is said with reference to the simile of
the saw.

SUTTA 105

995 See MN 12 and n.177.

996 Adhimanena. MA: They declare this out of conceit, consid-
ering themselves to have attained what they have not
attained.

997 MA: To make clear to them their level of attainment.

998 MA: Because they are motivated by desire, the Tatha-
gata's thought of teaching the Dhamma, which arises
towards true practitioners, changes (i.e., fades away).

999 Lokdmisa. These are the five cords of sensual pleasure.

1000 Anenja (BBS ed.); ananja (PTS ed.). This is a technical term
for the meditative attainments from the fourth jhana
through the four immaterial attainments. But since the
highest two immaterial attainments are dealt with sepa-
rately, it seems that in this sutta only the fourth jhana
and the lower two immaterial attainments are intended
as "the imperturbable."

1001 The Buddha.

1002 Reading with the BBS ed., evammanl assa atatham
samdnarh. This passage refers back to the problem of self-


1310 The Majjhima Nikaya


overestimation with which the discourse began.

1003 I read with the BBS ed., sa-upadiseso ti janamano, and
again just below, analah ca te antarayaya, "but it is inca-
pable of harming you." The SBJ ed. is in substantial
agreement but the PTS ed. gives the opposite readings,
anupadiseso ti mahhamano and alah ca te antarayaya.

1004 Any offence of the two classes, parajika and sanghadisesa;
see n.987. The analogy is difficult to apply with complete
precision, since if craving and ignorance had truly been
removed from him with only a trace left behind, the
bhikkhu would be a sekha; yet it is inconceivable that a
sekha would abandon the training or commit a defiled
offence. It seems that in this case the analogy must be
applied loosely, and the bhikkhu should be understood
as one who falsely imagines that craving and ignorance
have been removed from him.

1005 As at MN 66.17.

1006 As at MN 46.19.

SUTTA 106

1007 See n.1000. Here, too, the term "imperturbable" seems to
cover only the fourth jhana and the two lower immaterial
attainments.

1008 MA says both objective sensual pleasures and sensual
defilements are intended.

1009 MA glosses: "having transcended the sense-sphere world
and having resolved with a mind that has jhana as its
objective."

1010 MA explains the phrase "his mind acquires confidence in
this base" to mean that he attains either insight aimed at
reaching arahantship or the access to the fourth jhana- If
he gains access to the fourth jhana, this becomes his basis
for attaining "the imperturbable," i.e., the fourth jhana
itself. But if he gains insight, then he decides upon per-
fecting wisdom by deepening his insight in order to
reach arahantship. The decision "to perfect wisdom
may explain why so many of the following sections of
this sutta, though culminating in attainments along the
scale of concentration, are expressed in phrasing appro-


Notes to Sutta 106 1311


priate to the development of insight.

1011 MA explains that this passage describes the rebirth
process of one who could not realise arahantship after
reaching the fourth jhana. The "consciousness leading [to
rebirth]" ( samvattanikam viilnanarii) is the resultant con-
sciousness by which this person is reborn, and this has
the same imperturbable nature as the kammically forma-
tive consciousness that attained to the fourth jhana. Since
it is the fourth-jhana consciousness that determines
rebirth, this person will be reborn in one of the celestial
realms corresponding to the fourth jhana.

1012 MA says that this is the reflection of one who has
attained the fourth jhana. Since he includes material form
among the things to be transcended, if he attains to the
imperturbable he reaches the base of infinite space, and if
he does not attain arahantship he is reborn in the plane of
infinite space.

1013 MA says that this is the reflection of one who has attained
the base of infinite space. If he attains to the imper-
turbable, he reaches the base of infinite consciousness and
is reborn in that plane if he does not reach arahantship.

1014 This is the reflection of one who has attained the base of
infinite consciousness and aims at attaining the base of
nothingness.

1015 MA calls this two-pointed voidness - the absence of "I"
and "mine" - and says that this teaching of the base of
nothingness is expounded by way of insight rather than
concentration, the approach taken in the previous sec-
tion. At MN 43.33, this contemplation is said to lead to
the deliverance of mind through voidness.

1016 MA calls this four-pointed voidness and explains thus:
(i) he does not see his self anywhere; (ii) he does not see a
self of his own that can be treated as something belong-
ing to another, e.g., as a brother, friend, assistant, etc.;
(iii) he does not see the self of another; (iv) he does not
see the self of another that can be treated as something
belonging to him. Ms has a note by Nm: "These expres-
sions [in this paragraph and the next] seem to have been
stereotyped slogans or descriptions of the attainments of
nothingness and neither-perception-nor-non-perception.



1312 The Majjhima Nikaya


primarily non-Buddhist, and sometimes used as a basis
for the existing-body [=personality] view." See Nm's
note 19 to Vsm XXI, 53 for further discussion and other
references.

1017 MA glosses: "If the round of kamma had not been accu-
mulated by me, now there would not be for me the
round of results; if the round of kamma is not accumu-
lated by me now, in the future there will not be the
round of results." "What exists, what has come to be"
are the five aggregates. The first part of the formula
again seems to be a condensed formulation of a view
held by non-Buddhists. Several suttas identify it as an
expression for the annihilationist view, adapted by the
Buddha with new meanings assigned to it. For other
occurrences of this formula, see SN iii.55-56, 99, 183, 206;
AN iv.69-72, v.63.

1018 MA says that he obtains the equanimity of insight, but
from §11 it seems that the equanimity of the base of nei-
ther-perception-nor-non-perception is also intended.

1019 MA: This is said with reference to the rebirth of one who
attains the base of neither-perception-nor-non-perception.
The meaning is that he takes rebirth in the best, the high-
est, plane of existence.

1020 Nissaya nissaya oghassa nittharana. MA: The Buddha has
explained the crossing of the flood for a bhikkhu who
uses as the basis (for reaching arahantship) any of the
attainments from the third jhana up to the fourth imma-
terial attainment.

1021 MA: Ananda's question is intended to elicit from the
Buddha an account of the practice of the dry-insight
meditator (s ukkhavipassaka) , who attains arahantship
without depending on a jhanic attainment.

1022 Esa sakktiyo yavata sakkayo. MA: This is the personality in
its entirety - the round of the three realms of existence;
there is no personality outside of this.

1023 MA says that the arahantship of the dry-insight medita-
tor is intended. MT adds that arahantship is called "the
Deathless" because it has the flavour of the Deathless,
being attained on the basis of Nibbana the Deathless.


Notes to Suttas 107 and 108 1313


SUTTA 107

1024 MA: It is not possible to construct a seven-storied man-
sion in a single day. Once the site is cleared, from the
time the foundation is laid until the paint job is finished
there is gradual progress.

1025 Ganaka. His name means "Moggallana the Accountant."

1026 See MN 65.33.

1027 While the preceding steps of practice are necessary mea-
sures for bhikkhus in training to attain arahantship, they
are also beneficial to arahants in that they conduce to "a
pleasant abiding here and now." MA identifies this "abid-
ing" with the attainment of the fruit of arahantship, and
explains that some arahants can enter fruition easily at
any time while others must apply themselves diligently to
the steps of practice to enter fruition.

1028 Maggakkhayi Tathagato. Compare Dhp 276: "You your-
selves must strive; the Tathagatas only point the way."

1029 The following as at MN 5.32.

1030 Paramajjadhammesu. MA: The doctrine of Gotama is
supreme, the highest, among contemporary teachings -
the teachings of the six outside teachers.

SUTTA 108

1031 MA says that after the Buddha's relics had been distrib-
uted, Ven. Ananda had come to Rajagaha for the recita-
tion of the Dhamma (at the first Great Council).

1032 King Pajjota was a friend of King Bimbisara of Magadha,
who had been killed by his son Ajatasattu. According to
MA, Ajatasattu thought King Pajjota might seek to
avenge his friend's murder.

1033 See DN 16.1.2-5/iii.72-76.

1034 The import of this statement is that the Sangha is not
governed by the personal judgements of its members but
by the Dhamma and disciplinary code laid down for it by
the Buddha. In this the bhikkhus follow the Buddha's
final injunction: "What I have taught and explained to
you as Dhamma and Discipline will, at my passing, be
your teacher" (DN 16.6.1/ii.l54).


1314 The Majjhima Nikaya


1035 See n.525.

SUITA 109

1036 The fifteenth day of the fortnight. See n.59 and n.809.

1037 MA explains that this bhikkhu was himself an arahant
and the teacher of sixty other bhikkhus who lived with
him in the forest, striving in meditation. With their
teacher's guidance they had developed various insight
knowledges but could not attain the paths and fruits.
Therefore their teacher brought them to see the Buddha
in the hope that he could guide them to the supramun-
dane attainments. The teacher asks the questions, not
because he has doubts, but in order to dispel the doubts
of his disciples.

1038 Chandamulakd. MA glosses chanda by tanha, craving,
which is the origin of the suffering comprised by the five
aggregates.

1039 As at MN 44.6.

1040 In the material form aggregate each of the four great ele-
ments is a condition for the other three and for derived
material form. Contact is a condition for each of the three
middle aggregates, as it is said: "Contacted one feels,
bhikkhus; contacted one perceives; contacted one wills"
(SN 35:93 /iv.68). MA explains that at fhe moment of con-
ception, the material phenomena and the three mental
aggregates that arise are the mentality-materiality that is a
condition for the rebirth consciousness. During the course
of life the physical sense faculties and the sense objects
together with the three mental aggregates are the mentali-
ty-materiality that is a condition for sense consciousness.

1041 As at MN 44.7-8.

1042 It seems that this bhikkhu had difficulty in understand-
ing how kamma can produce results without a self to
receive them.

1043 The readings of this sentence are highly divergent in dif-
ferent editions. The same sutta appears at SN 22:82/
iii.104, and the reading there ( patipuccha vimta) seems
preferable to the reading here (in the PTS ed., paticca
vimtd ; in the BBS ed., pativimta). The translation here fob


Notes to Suttas 109-111 1315


lows the Samyutta text. Nm's translation, based on the
PTS Majjhima text, reads: "Now, bhikkhus, you have
been trained by me in dependent [conditionality] in vari-
ous instances." Neither version is idiomatic Pali, and the
commentaries to both Nikayas are silent.

1044 MA: The sixty bhikkhus discarded their original medita-
tion subjects and investigated a new subject (based on
the Buddha's discourse, MT). Without breaking their
posture, right in their seats they attained arahantship.

sutta 110

1045 Asappurisa. MA glosses by papapurisa, an evil man.

SUITA 111

1046 Anupadadhammavipassana. MA explains that he devel-
oped insight into states in successive order by way of the
meditative attainments and the jhana factors, as will be
described. The two-week period referred to fell from the
time of Ven. Sariputta's ordination under the Buddha to
his attainment of arahantship while listening to the
Buddha explain the comprehension of feeling to
Dlghanakha (see MN 74.14).

1047 The first five states in the list are the jhana factors proper
of the first jhana; the following states are additional com-
ponents each performing their individual functions with-
in the jhana. This minute analysis of mental states into
their components anticipates the methodology of the
Abhidhamma, and it is thus no coincidence that the
name of Sariputta is so closely linked with the emergence
of the Abhidhamma literature.

1048 All these terms signify the temporary suppression of the
defilements by the power of the jhana, not the full libera-
tion from defilements through their eradication by the
highest path, which Ven. Sariputta had yet to attain.

1049 The "escape beyond" {uttarim nissaranam) here is the next
higher attainment, the second jhana.

1050 Reading with the BBS ed. passaddhatta cetaso anabhogo.
MA explains that the mental concern with pleasure.


1316 The Majjhima Nikaya


which persists in the third jhana, is now considered to be
gross, and when it subsides there is "mental unconcern
due to tranquillity." The PTS ed. reading, passi vedana, is
unintelligible and clearly an error.

1051 This indirect introspective method must be used to con-
template the fourth immaterial attainment because this
attainment, being extremely subtle, does not enter into
the direct range of investigation for disciples. Only fully
enlightened Buddhas are able to contemplate it directly.

1052 MA offers this explanation of the passage, transmitted by
"the elders of India": "The Elder Sariputta cultivated
serenity and insight in paired conjunction and realised
the fruit of non-returning. Then he entered the attain-
ment of cessation, and after emerging from it he attained
arahantship."

1053 Since there are no mental factors in the attainment of ces-
sation, MA says that "these states" here must refer either
to the states of material form that were occurring while
he attained cessation, or to the mental factors of the pre-
ceding fourth immaterial attainment.

1054 Note the realisation that there is "no escape beyond" the
attainment of arahantship.

1055 Vasippatto paramipatto. See n.763.

SUTTA 112

*■

1056 See n.17.

1057 As at MN 111.4, but here these terms are intended to
express the complete eradication of defilements by the
path of arahantship.

1058 MA: All these terms signify craving and views.

1059 MA: The first phrase negates the consideration of the
earth element as self, the second negates the considera-
tion of the material and mental factors other than the
earth element as self. The same method applies to the
other elements.

1060 The text appears redundant in mentioning both forms
(rupa) and things cognizable (by the mind) through eye-
consciousness ( cakkhuvihham-vihhatabbd dhamma). MA
mentions two opinions proposed to resolve this problem.


Notes to Suttas 112 and 113 1317


One holds that "forms" refers to visible things that actu-
ally enter into cognition, "things cognizable..." to visible
things that cease without being cognized. The second
holds that the former term signifies all form without dis-
tinction, the latter term the three mental aggregates that
function in association with eye-consciousness.

1061 MA explains "I-making" ( ahankam ) as conceit and "mine-
making" ( mamankara ) as craving. "All external signs"
( nimitta ) are external objects.

1062 MA: The recollection of past lives and the knowledge of
the passing away and reappearance of beings (usually
included in this type of exposition) are here omitted
because the original question at §11 concerned the attain-
ment of arahantship, not mundane attainments.

1063 MA says that this sutta is also called the Ekavissajjita
Sutta (The Single Answer Discourse). MA finds it diffi-
cult to account for the "sixfold" mentioned in the original
title, since only five questions and answers have come
down in the discourse. It suggests dividing the last item
into two - one's own body with its consciousness and the
conscious bodies of others - and also mentions another
opinion that the four nutriments should be brought in as
the sixth. Neither of these suggestions, however, appears
cogent, and it seems likely that a section has been lost.

SUTTA 113

1064 Sappurisadhamma; asappurisadhamma.

1065 These are nine of the thirteen ascetic practices discussed
in Vsm II.

1066 MA explains "non-identification" ( atammayata , lit. "not
consisting of that") as the absence of craving. However,
the context suggests that the absence of conceit may be
the meaning. The statement "for in whatever way they
conceive, the fact is ever other than that" (yena yena hi
mahnanti tato tam hoti ahhatha) is a philosophical riddle
appearing also at Sn 588, Sn 757, and Ud 3.T0. Though
MA is silent, the Udana commentary explains it to mean
that in whatever way worldly people conceive any of the
five aggregates - as self or self's belonging, etc. - the thing


1318 The Majjhima Nikaya


conceived turns out to be other than the aspect ascribed to
it: it is not self or self's belonging, not “I" or "mine."

1067 It should be noted that there is no passage on the untrue
man entering the cessation of perception and feeling.
Unlike the jhanas and immaterial attainments, which can
be attained by worldlings, cessation is the domain exclu-
sively of non-returners and arahants.

1068 Na kind mahhati, na kuhihd mahhati, na kenad mahnati.
This is a brief statement of the same situation described
in full at MN 1.51-146. On "conceiving" see n.6

sutta 114

1069 This first paragraph offers merely a "table of contents,"
to be elaborated in the body of the sutta.

1070 Ahhamahham. MA: The two are mutually exclusive, and
there is no way by which the one can be regarded as
the other.

1071 Although wrong view and right view are usually includ-
ed under mental conduct, in this sutta they are shown
separately in §10 as "the acquisition of view."

1072 Whereas the covetousness and ill will described in §7
possess the strength of a full course of action ( kamma -
patha), in this section on inclination of mind ( dttuppada )
they are shown in their nascent stage as mere disposi-
tions that have not yet erupted into obsessive volitions.

1073 "Acquisition of individuality" ( attabhavapatilabha ) here
refers to mode of rebirth.

1074 Aparinitthitabhava. The translation of this unusual expres-
sion follows the gloss by MA.

1075 MA points out that the clause "Forms are either the one
or the other" is not used here because the distinction
does not lie in the object but in the approach to it. For one
person lust and other defilements arise towards a partic-
ular form, but another person develops dispassion and
detachment in regard to the same form.

1076 MA says that those who study the text and commentary
to this sutta without practising in accordance with it can-
not be said to "understand the detailed meaning." Only
those who practise accordingly can be so described.


Notes to Sutta 115 1319


sutta 115

1077 The eighteen elements are defined at Vbh §§183-84/
87-90 and are explained in detail at Vsm XV, 17-43.
Briefly, the mind element ( manodhatu ), according to the
Abhidhamma, includes the consciousness that adverts to
the five sense objects impinging on the five sense facul-
ties ( pancadvaravajjana-citta ) and the consciousness that
receives the object after it has been cognized through the
senses ( sampaticchana-citta ). The mind-consciousness ele-
ment ( manovinnanadhatu ) includes all types of conscious-
ness except the five sense consciousnesses and the mind-
element. The mind-object element ( dhammadhatu )
includes the types of subtle material phenomena not
involved in sense cognition, the three mental aggregates
of feeling, perception, and formations, and Nibbana. It
does not include concepts, abstract ideas, judgements,
etc. Though these latter are included in the notion of
mind-object ( dhatnmarammana ), the mind-object element
includes only things that exist by their own nature, not
things constructed by the mind.

1078 These are defined at Vbh §180/85-86. The pleasure and
pain elements are bodily pleasant and painful feeling; the
joy and grief elements are mental pleasant and painful feel-
ing; the equanimity element is neither-painful-nor-pleasant
feeling. MA says that ignorance is brought in because of
its apparent similarity to the equanimity element.

1079 Vbh §183/86-87 defines these as the six corresponding
types of applied thought ( vitakka ); see MN 19.2.

1080 MA explains the sense-sphere element as the five aggre-
gates pertaining to the sense-sphere ( kdmavacara ), the
fine-material element as the five aggregates pertaining to
the fine-material sphere ( rupavacara ), and the immaterial
element as the four aggregates pertaining to the immater-
ial sphere (arupdvacara).

1081 MA: the conditioned element includes everything pro-
duced by conditions and is a designation for the five
aggregates. The unconditioned element is Nibbana.

1082 The twelve bases are defined at Vbh §§155-167/70-73
and explained at Vsm XV, 1-16. The mind base includes


1320 The Majjhima Nikaya


all types of consciousness, and thus comprises all seven
elements that exercise the function of consciousness. The
mind-object base is identical with the mind-object element.

1083 On the terms in the formula of dependent origination,
see Introduction, pp. 30-31.

1084 MA: A person possessing right view ( ditthisampanno ) is
one possessing the view of the path, a noble disciple at
the minimal level of a stream-enterer. "Formation" here
is to be understood as a conditioned formation (s ankhata-
sankhara), i.e., anything conditioned.

1085 MA points out that a noble disciple below the level of
arahantship can still apprehend formations as pleasur-
able with a mind dissociated from wrong view, but he
cannot adopt the view that any formation is pleasurable.
Although perceptions and thoughts of formations as
pleasurable arise in him, he knows reflectively that such
notions are mistaken.

1086 In the passage on self, sankhara, "formation," is replaced
by dhamma, "thing." MA explains that this substitution is

■i made to include concepts, such as a kasina sign, etc.,
which the ordinary person is also prone to identify as
self. However, in view of the fact that Nibbana is
described as imperishable ( accuta ) and as bliss ( sukha ),
and is also liable to be misconceived as self (see
MN 1.26), the word sankhara may be taken to include
only the conditioned, while dhamma includes both the
conditioned and the unconditioned. This interpretation,
however, is not endorsed by the commentaries of
Acariya Buddhaghosa.

1087 This section distinguishes the ordinary person and noble
disciple in terms of the five heinous crimes. MA points
out that a noble disciple is in fact incapable of intention-
ally depriving any living being of life, but the contrast is
made here by way of matricide and patricide to stress the
dangerous side of the ordinary person's condition and
the strength of the noble disciple.

1088 That is, could acknowledge anyone other than the
Buddha as the supreme spiritual teacher.

1089 MA: The arising of another Buddha is impossible from
the time a bodhisatta takes his final conception in his


Notes to Suttas 115 and 116 1321


mother's womb until his Dispensation has completely
disappeared. The problem is discussed at Miln 236-39.

1090 This statement asserts only that a Fully Enlightened
Buddha always has the male sex, but does not deny that
a person who is now a woman may become a Fully
Enlightened Buddha in the future. To do so, however, at
an earlier point she will have had to be reborn as a man.

1091 In this passage the phrase "on that account, for that rea-
son" ( tannidana tappaccaya) is of prime importance. As the
Buddha will show in MN 136, a person who engages in
evil conduct may be reborn in a heavenly world and a
person who engages in good conduct may be reborn in a
lower world. But in those cases the rebirth will be caused
by some kamma different from the kamma in which the
person habitually engages. Strict lawfulness applies only
to the relation between kamma and its result.

1092 The "four cycles" are the elements, the bases, dependent
origination, and the possible and the impossible.

SUTTA 116

1093 In Sri Lanka this sutta is regularly recited as a protective
discourse and is included in the medieval compilation,
Maha Pirit Pota, "The Great Book of Protection."

1094 This and the following are mountains surrounding
Rajagaha.

1095 A paccekabuddha is one who attains enlightenment and
liberation on his own, without relying on the Dhamma
taught by the Buddha, but is not capable of teaching the
Dhamma to others and establishing the Dispensation.
Paccekabuddhas arise only at a time when no Dispen-
sation of a Buddha exists in the world. For a fuller study
of the subject see Ria Kloppenborg, The Paccekabuddha: A
Buddhist Ascetic.

1096 Ayam pabbato ime zsz gilati: a word play is involved here.

1097 Tagarasikhin is referred to at Ud 5:4/50 and SN 3:20/i.92.

1098 Nm remarks in Ms that without the aid of the commen-
tary it is extremely difficult to distinguish the proper
names of the paccekabuddhas from their descriptive
epithets.


1322 The Majjhima Nikaya


SUITA 117

1099 Ariyam samma samadhim sa-upanisam saparikkharam. MA
explains "noble" here as supramundane, and says that
this is the concentration pertaining to the supramundane
path. Its "supports and requisites," as will be shown, are
the other seven path factors.

1100 Pubbangama, lit. "the forerunner." MA says that two
kinds of right view are forerunners: the right view of
insight, which investigates formations as impermanent,
suffering, and non-self; and the right view of the path,
which arises as a consequence of insight and effects the
radical destruction of defilements. The right view of
insight as the forerunner seems to be shown in §§4, 10,
16, 22 and 28; the right view of the path as forerunner in
§§34 and 35.

1101 This statement suggests that in order to acquire right
view about the nature of reality, one must first be able to
distinguish between wrong and right teachings on the
nature of reality. MA says that this is the right view of
insight which understands wrong view as an object by
penetrating its characteristics of impermanence, etc., and
which understands right view by exercising the function
of comprehension and by clearing away confusion.

1102 This is mundane right view, a meritorious factor that
conduces to a .favourable rebirth but cannot by itself
issue in a transcendence of conditioned existence.

1103 This definition defines supramundane right view as the
wisdom (panha) found among the requisites of enlighten-
ment as a faculty, power, enlightenment factor, and path
factor. The definition is formulated by way of the cogni-
tive function rather than the objective content of the
view. Elsewhere (MN 141.24) the right view of the path is
defined as knowledge of the Four Noble Truths. We may
understand that the conceptual comprehension of the
four truths falls under mundane right view, while the
direct penetration of the truths by realising Nibbana with
the path constitutes supramundane right view.

1104 MA: They accompany right view as its co-existents and
precursors. Right effort and right mindfulness are


Notes to Sum 117 1323


co-existent with supramundane right view; the right view
of insight is the precursor of supramundane right view.

1105 MA explains this as the right view of insight which
understands right intention by way of its function and by
clearing away confusion. It seems, though, that a more
elementary discrimination of the two kinds of intention
is the issue.

1106 This is the standard definition of right intention as a fac-
tor of the Noble Eightfold Path; see MN 141.25.

1107 In this definition, the factor of intention ( sankappa ) is
identified with applied thought ( vitakka ), which is further
specified as the factor responsible for absorption by fix-
ing and directing the mind upon its object. For applied
thought as "verbal formation," see MN 44.15.

1108 MA: This statement refers exclusively to the co-existent
factors accompanying supramundane right intention. In
the preliminary phase of the practice, the three mundane
right intentions arise separately, but at the moment of the
supramundane path, a single right intention arises cut-
ting off the threefold wrong intention. Thus the supra-
mundane right intention may also be described as the
intention of renunciation, non-ill will, and non-cruelty.
The same method applies to right speech, etc.

1109 Whereas mundane right speech is exercised in four dif-
ferent modes according to the type of wrong speech from
which there is abstinence, on the occasion of the supra-
mundane path, the single factor of right speech exercises
the fourfold function of cutting off the tendencies
towards the four kinds of wrong speech. The same prin-
ciple applies to right action.

1110 These are wrong means for bhikkhus to acquire their
requisites; they are explained at Vsm I, 61-65. MA says
that those mentioned in the sutta are not the only kinds
of wrong livelihood, which include any mode of earning
one's living that involves transgression of the precepts.
At AN 5:177 / iii.208, the Buddha mentions five kinds of
wrong livelihood for lay people: dealing in arms, beings,
meat, intoxicants, and poisons.

1111 MA explains that for one having the right view of the
path, the right intention of the path comes into being;




1324 The Majjhima Niteya


similarly, for one having the right view of the fruit, the
right intention of the fruit comes into being. Similarly,
the following factors except the last two also refer to the
supramundane path.

1112 The additional two factors possessed by the arahant are
right knowledge, which can be identified with his
reviewing knowledge that he has destroyed all the defile-
ments, and right deliverance, which can be identified
with his experience of liberation from all defilements.

1113 The twenty factors on the wholesome side are the ten
right factors and the wholesome states that originate from
each; the twenty factors on the unwholesome side are the
ten wrong factors and the unwholesome states that origi-
nate from each. Hence the name "The Great Forty."

1114 MA says only that these two were individuals who lived
in the country of Okkala. Otherwise their identity is
unknown.

SUTTA 118

1115 The Pavarana is the ceremony that concludes the rains
residence, at which the bhikkhus invite each other to
admonish them for their transgressions.

1116 Komudl is the full-moon day of the month of Kattika, the
fourth month of the rainy season; it is called by this name
because the white water-lily ( kumuda ) is said to bloom at
that time.

1117 Explanatory notes for the first tetrad will be found at
nn.140-142. MN 10.4 differs from this passage only by
the addition of the simile. Since Acariya Buddhaghosa
has commented on the four tetrads on mindfulness of
breathing in the Visuddhimagga, in MA he merely refers
the reader to the latter work for explanation. Notes
1118-21 are drawn from Vsm VIII, 226-37, also included
by Nm in his Mindfulness of Breathing.

1118 One experiences rapture in two ways: by attaining one of
the lower two jhanas in which rapture is present, one expe-
riences rapture in the mode of serenity; by emerging from
that jhana and contemplating that rapture as subject to
destruction, one experiences rapture in the mode of insight-



Notes to Sutta 118 1325


1119 The same method of explanation as in n.1118 applies to
the second and third clauses, except that the second com-
prises the three lower jhanas and the third all four jhanas.
The mental formation is perception and feeling (see
MN 44.14), which is tranquillised by the development of
successively higher levels of serenity and insight.

1120 "Experiencing the mind" is to be understood by way of
the four jhanas. "Gladdening the mind" is explained
either as the attainment of the two jhanas containing rap-
ture or as the penetration of those jhanas with insight as
subject to destruction, etc. "Concentrating the mind"
refers either to the concentration pertaining to the jhana
or to the momentary concentration that arises along with
insight. "Liberating the mind" means liberating it from
hindrances and grosser jhanic factors by successively
higher levels of concentration, and from the cognitive
distortions by way of insight knowledge.

1121 This tetrad deals entirely with insight, unlike the previ-
ous three, which deal with both serenity and insight.
"Contemplating fading away" and "contemplating cessa-
tion" can be understood both as the insight into the
impermanence of formations and as the supramundane
path realising Nibbana, called the fading away of lust
(i.e., dispassion, virago) and the cessation of suffering.
"Contemplating relinquishment" is the giving up of
defilements through insight and the entering into
Nibbana by attainment of the path.

1122 MA: In-and-out breathing is to be counted as the air ele-
ment among the four elements making up the body. It
should also be included in the base of tangibles among
bodily phenomena (since the object of attention is the touch
sensation of the breath entering and leaving the nostrils).

1123 MA explains that close attention ( sadhuka manasikara ) is
not itself actually feeling, but is spoken of as such only
figuratively. In the second tetrad the actual feeling is the
pleasure mentioned in the second clause and also the
feeling comprised by the expression "mental formation"
in the third and fourth clauses.

1124 MA: Although the meditating bhikkhu takes as his
object the sign of in-and-out breathing, he is said to be


1326 The Majjhima Nikaya


"contemplating mind as mind" because he maintains his
mind on the object by arousing mindfulness and full
awareness, two factors of mind.

1125 MA: Covetousness and grief signify the first two hin-
drances, sensual desire and ill will, and thus represent
the contemplation of mind-objects, which begins with the
five hindrances. The bhikkhu sees the abandoning of the
hindrances effected by the contemplations of imperma-
nence, fading away, cessation, and relinquishment, and
thus comes to look upon the object with equanimity.

1126 MA says that the above passage shows the enlighten-
ment factors existing together in each mind-moment in
the practice of insight meditation.

1127 See n.48.

1128 MA: The mindfulness that comprehends breathing is
mundane; the mundane mindfulness of breathing perfects
the mundane foundations of mindfulness; the mundane
foundations of mindfulness perfect the supramundane
enlightenment factors; and the supramundane enlighten-
ment factors perfect (or fulfil) true knowledge and deliver-
ance, i.e., the fruit and Nibbana.

SUITA 119

1129 §§4-17 of this sutta is identical with MN 10.4-30, except
that here the refrain on insight has been replaced by the
refrain that begins "As he abides thus diligent." This
change indicates a shift in emphasis from insight in
MN 10 to concentration in the present sutta. This shift
reappears in the passage on the jhanas at §§18-21 and the
passage on the direct knowledges at §§37-41, both of
which distinguish this sutta from MN 10.

1130 The similes for the jhanas are also found at MN 39.15-18
and MN 77.25-28.

1131 Vijjabhagiyd dhamma. MA explains these states as the
eight types of knowledge expounded at MN 77.29-36.


Notes to Sutta 120 1327


sutta 120

1132 Although I have attempted to render sankharct consistent-
ly throughout as "formations," here it seemed that the
content required a different rendering to bring the intend-
ed meaning to light. Nm had used "determinations," his
own consistent choice for s ankhara. MA initially explains
sankharupapatti as meaning either reappearance (i.e.,
rebirth) of mere formations, not of a being or person, or
reappearance of the aggregates in a new existence
through a meritorious kamma- formation. However, in subse-
quent passages, MA glosses sankharZ with patthana, a
word unambiguously meaning aspiration.

1133 MA: "The way" is the five qualities beginning with faith,
together with the aspiration. One who has either the
five qualities without the aspiration, or the aspiration
without the qualities, does not have a fixed destination.
The destination can only be fixed when both factors are
present.

1134 MA explains that there are five kinds of pervasion: perva-
sion of mind, i.e., knowing the thoughts of the beings
throughout a thousand worlds; pervasion of the kasina,
i.e., extending the kasina image to a thousand worlds;
pervasion of the divine eye, i.e., seeing a thousand worlds
with the divine eye; pervasion of light, which is the same
as the previous pervasion; and pervasion of body, i.e.,
extending one's bodily aura to a thousand worlds.

1135 See n.426.

1136 MA: The five qualities mentioned are sufficient for
rebirth into the sense-sphere realm, but for the higher
modes of rebirth and the destruction of the taints, more- is
required. Basing oneself on the five qualities, if one
attains the jhanas, one is reborn in the Brahma-world; if
one attains the immaterial attainments, one is reborn in
the immaterial world; if one develops insight and attains
the fruit of non-returning, one is reborn in the Pure
Abodes; and if one reaches the path of arahantship, one
attains the destruction of the taints.


1328 The Majjhima Nikaya


sutta 121


Suhnatavihara. The discourse will gradually make it
clear that this refers to the fruition attainment of void-
ness ( sunmtaphala-samdpatti ), the fruition attainment of
arahantship that is entered by focusing upon the void
aspect of Nibbana. See n.458.

MA: He attends to the perception of forest dependent on
the single forest itself, thinking: "This is a forest, this is a
tree, this is a mountain, this a grove."

MA and MT explain the sense of this passage thus: The
disturbance of defilements - attraction and repulsion -
that arise through perception of people are not present
here. But there is still the disturbance caused by the
occurrence of gross states due to lack of the necessary
tranquillity.

MA: He abandons the perception of forest and attends to
the perception of earth because one cannot achieve any
distinction in meditation through the perception of for-
est, neither access concentration nor full absorption. But
earth can be used as the preliminary object for kasina, on
the basis of which one produces jhana, develops insight,
and attains arahantship.

Having used the perception of earth to attain the four
jhanas, he extends the earth-kasina and then removes
the kasina sign to attain the base of infinite space. See
Vsm X, 6-7.

Animitta cetosamddhi. MA: This is the concentration of the
mind in insight; it is called "signless" because it is devoid
of the signs of permanence, etc.

See MN 52.4. MA calls this "counter-insight" (pativipas-
sand), i.e., the application of the principles of insight to
the act of consciousness that exercises the function of
insight. On the basis of this he attains arahantship.

Here the words "supreme and unsurpassed" ( paramclnut -
tarn) have been added. MA says that this is the arahant's
fruition attainment of voidness.


Notes to Sutta 122 1329


sutta 122

1145 This sutta together with its full commentary has been
published in translation by Nm as The Greater Discourse
on Voidness.

1146 MA: This was a dwelling built in Nigrodha's Park by
Kalakhemaka the Sakyan. Beds, chairs, mattresses, and
mats were prepared, and they were so close together that
the dwelling looked like the residence of a society of
bhikkhus.

1147 MA explains that this was merely a rhetorical question,
since the Buddhas can know by direct knowledge what-
ever they wish to know. The Buddha asked this with the
thought in mind: "As soon as these bhikkhus form into a
society and delight in society, they will act in improper
ways. I shall expound the Great Practice of Voidness which
will be like a training rule [prohibiting delight in society]."

1148 MA: Ven. Ananda intended to say: "These bhikkhus are
living this way not just because they delight in being
busy, but on account of making robes."

1149 See MN 66.20 and n.678.

1150 The former is deliverance through the jhanas and the
immaterial attainments, the latter deliverance through
the supramundane paths and fruits. See also MN 29.6
and n.348.

1151 MA: The Buddha begins the present passage in order to
ward off the criticism that while he enjoins his disciples
to live in solitude, he himself is often surrounded by a
large retinue. "Voidness" here is the fruition attainment
of voidness; see n.1137.

1152 MA explains voidness internally as that connected with
one's own five aggregates, voidness externally as that con-
nected with the aggregates of others. The voidness spoken
of here thus must be the temporary deliverance of mind
reached through the insight contemplation of non-self, as
explained at MN 43.33. When the insight into non-self is
brought to the level of the path, it issues in the fruition
experiencing Nibbana by way of its aspect of voidness.

1153 MA: He gives attention to an imperturbable immaterial
meditative attainment.


1330 The Majjhima Nikaya


1154 MA: This refers to the jhana that was used as the basis for
insight. If, after emerging from the basic jhana, his mind
does not enter into voidness through insight contempla-
tion on his own aggregates or those of others, and he also
cannot attain the imperturbable immaterial attainment,
he should return to the same basic jhana that he origin-
ally developed and attend to it again and again.

1155 According to MA, up to this point the Buddha has shown
the training for the attainment of the first two paths,
those of stream-entry and once-returning. He now
speaks the present passage (§§14-15) to point out the
insight needed to attain the path of non-returning, which
culminates in the abandoning of sensual desire.

1156 This passage (§§16-17) points out the insight needed to
attain the path of arahantship, which culminates in the
abandoning of the conceit "I am."

1157 Acariyupaddava, antevasupaddava, brahmacariyupaddava.
Upaddava may also be rendered as disaster, calamity. MA
explains that the Buddha speaks the present passage to
show the danger in solitude when one does not fulfil the
proper purpose of solitary living. The "teacher" is a
teacher outside the Buddha's Dispensation.

1158 MA: The going forth into homelessness outside the
Dispensation brings small gain, so one who falls away
from that falls away only from mundane attainment; he
meets with no great suffering, as one who falls from the
back of a donkey merely becomes covered with dust. But
the going forth in the Buddha's Dispensation brings
great gain - the paths, fruits, and Nibbana. Thus one who
falls away from this meets great suffering, like one who
falls from the back of an elephant.

1159 The contrast in this simile is between the way the potter
treats the raw damp clay and the way he treats the baked
pots produced from the clay. MA paraphrases: "After
advising once I shall not be silent; I shall advise and
instruct by repeatedly admonishing you. Just as the pot-
ter tests the baked pots, puts aside those that are cracked,
split, or faulty, and keeps only those that pass the test, so
I shall advise and instruct by repeatedly testing you.
Those among you who are sound, having reached the


Notes to Suttas 122 and 123 1331


paths and fruits, will stand the test." MA adds that the
mundane virtuous qualities are also intended as a crite-
rion of soundness.

sutta 123

1160 This ability is exemplified by DN 14, which provides
detailed information about the six Buddhas preceding
Gotama.

1161 This refers to the Bodhisatta's rebirth in the Tusita heav-
en, which followed his preceding human existence as
Vessantara and preceded his birth in the human world as
Siddhattha Gotama.

1162 MA: Between every three world systems there is an inter-
space measuring 8,000 yojanas; it is like the space between
three cartwheels or almsbowls touching one another. The
beings who live there have taken rebirth there because of
committing some heavy, terrible offence against their
parents or righteous recluses and brahmins, or because of
some habitual evil deed like killing animals, etc.

1163 MA: The four deities were the Four Great Kings (the pre-
siding deities of the heaven of the Four Great Kings).

1164 MA: This happened, not through a defect in the birth, but
through the expiration of her lifespan; for the place (in
the womb) occupied by the Bodhisatta, like the inner
chamber of a cetiya, is not to be used by others.

1165 MA explains each aspect of this event as a foretoken of
the Buddha's later attainments. Thus, his standing with
his feet ( pada ) firmly on the ground was a foretoken of his
attaining the four bases for spiritual power ( iddhipada );
his facing the north, of his going above and beyond the
multitude; his seven steps, of his acquiring the seven
enlightenment factors; the white parasol, of his acquiring
the parasol of deliverance; his surveying the quarters, of
his acquiring the unobstructed knowledge of omni-
science; his uttering the words of the Leader of the Herd,
of his setting in motion the irreversible Wheel of the
Dhamma; his statement "This is my last birth," of his
passing away into the Nibbana element with no residue
remaining (of the factors of existence).


1332 The Majjhima Nikaya

1166 This statement seems to be the Buddha's way of calling
attention to the quality he regarded as the true wonder
and marvel.

sutta 124

1167 According to MA, Ven. Bakkula became a monk in his
eightieth year, which would make him 160 at the time
this sutta takes place. He was declared by the Buddha to
be the foremost disciple with respect to good health.

1168 MA says that the passages here enclosed in brackets were
added by the elders who compiled the Dhamma.

1169 This passage and those to follow show Ven. Bakkula as
an observer of the ascetic practices. The kathina time is
the period following the three-month rains residence
when bhikkhus make new robes from the cloth they
have received.

1170 MA says that after he went forth, he was an ordinary
man for seven days, but on the eighth day he attained
arahantship together with the analytical knowledges
( patisambhids ).

1171 MA: Ven. Bakkula himself did not give the ordination
(which would have been a violation of his mode of prac-
tice) but arranged for other bhikkhus to give it.

1172 MA: Ven. Bakkula had considered that all his life he had
never made himself a burden to the other bhikkhus, and
he did not want his body to be a burden after his death.
Thus he entered into meditation on the heat element arid
attained final Nibbana by causing his entire body to be
consumed by the blaze. Only the relics remained.

1173 MA says that this sutta was recited at the second compi-
lation of the Dhamma, held about a hundred years after
the Buddha's passing away.

sutta 125

1174 MA identifies Prince Jayasena as a son of King
Bimbisara.

1175 The simile as at MN 90.11.

1176 Note that here the four foundations of mindfulness are ex-
pounded in the place usually reserved for the four jhanas.


Notes to Suttas 125-127 1333


1177 Since the exposition begins here directly with the sec-
ond jhana, this suggests that the earlier passage on the
development of the foundations of mindfulness must
have implicitly covered the first jhana.

sutta 126

1178 MA says that Ven. Bhumija was the uncle of Prince
Jayasena.

1179 Asam karitva : if one makes a wish, if one raises a hope or
expectation. The recluses and brahmins who held this
view must have been the sceptics or the annihilationists.

SUTTA 127

1180 Appamana cetovimutti, mahaggata cetovimutti. At MN 43.31,
as here, the immeasurable deliverance of mind is
explained as the four brahmaviharas. Since the formula for
each brahmavihara includes the word "exalted," Panca-
kanga was apparently misled into supposing that the
two deliverances were the same in meaning.

1181 MA: He covers an area the size of one tree root with his
kasina sign, and he abides resolved upon that kasina
sign, pervading it with the exalted jhana. The same
method of explanation applies to the following cases.

1182 MA: This teaching is undertaken to show the kinds of
rebirth that result from the attainment of the exalted
deliverance.

1183 MA explains that there are no separate realms of gods
called those of "Defiled Radiance" and those of "Pure
Radiance." Both are subdivisions within the two realms -
the gods of Limited Radiance and the gods of Immeasur-
able Radiance. Rebirth among the gods of Limited Radiance
is determined by the attainment of the (second) jhana with
a limited kasina sign, rebirth among the gods of Im-
measurable Radiance by the attainment of the same jhana
with an extended kasina sign. Rebirth with defiled radiance
is for those who have not mastered the jhana and purified it
of obstructive states; rebirth with pure radiance is for those
who have acquired this mastery and purification.


1334 The Majjhima Nikaya


1184 A pun is involved here. In Pali the verb jhayati means
both to bum and to meditate, though the two meanings
are derived from different Sanskrit verbs: kshayati is to
burn, dhyayati to meditate.

1185 Abhiya's words are discourteous because they inquire
very directly into the personal experience of Ven.
Anuruddha. MA says that while fulfilling the perfections
( paramls ) in past lives, Anuruddha had gone forth as a
recluse, reached the meditative attainments, and passed
three hundred existences without interruption in the
Brahma-world. Hence his reply.

sutta 128

1186 The opening of this sutta is the same as that of MN 48.

1187 This verse and the next two appear at Dhp 3, 5-6. The
last three verses appear at Dhp 328-30.

1188 The passage at §§8-15 is nearly identical with MN 31.3-10.
From the sequel, however, it is clear that the present sutta
is set at an earlier time, for in MN 31 all three bhikkhus
have reached arahantship while here they are still striv-
ing for the goal.

1189 It is here that the present sutta continues differently from
MN 31. MA explains light ( obhdsa ) as the preliminary
light, which MT glosses as the light- produced by the
access to jhana. MT adds that one who gains the fourth
jhana develops the light-kasina as the preliminary to
arousing the divine eye. The "vision of forms" ( dassanam
rtlpamm) is the seeing of forms with the divine eye. Ven.
Anuruddha was later declared by the Buddha to be the
foremost disciple in the exercise of the divine eye.

1190 Nimittam pativijjhitabbam. Lit. "You should penetrate
that sign."

1191 See MN 52.15.

1192 MA paraphrases: "While I was attending to a single type
of form, longing arose. Thinking 'I will attend to different
kinds of forms/ sometimes I directed my attention
towards the heavenly world, sometimes towards the
human world. As I attended to different kinds of forms,
perception of diversity arose in me."


Notes to Suttas 128 and 129 1335


1193 Atinijjhayitattam rupanam. MA: "When perception of
diversity arose, I thought I would attend to one type of
form, whether agreeable or disagreeable. As I did so,
excessive meditation upon forms arose in me."

1194 Cittassa upakkileso. The same term is used at MN 7.3,
though here it means not so much defilements of the
mind as imperfections in the development of concentra-
tion. Hence the expression has been rendered slightly dif-
ferently in the two cases.

1195 The "three ways" seem to be the first three types of con-
centration mentioned in the next paragraph, also spoken
of as a triad at DN 33.1.10/iii.219. Of these, the first is the
first jhana and the third covers the three higher jhanas of
the usual fourfold scheme. The second type of concentra-
tion has no place in the fourfold scheme, but appears as
the second jhana in a fivefold division of jhanas
expounded in the Abhidhamma Pitaka. This second
jhana of the fivefold scheme is attained by those who
cannot overcome applied thought and sustained thought
simultaneously but must eliminate them successively.

1196 MA: The concentration with rapture is the two lower
jhanas; without rapture, the two higher jhanas; accompa-
nied by enjoyment {sata), the three lower jhanas; accom-
panied by equanimity, the fourth jhana.

1197 MA says that the Buddha developed these concentrations
in the last watch of the night on the night of his enlight-
enment while sitting at the foot of the Bodhi tree.

sutta 129

1198 As at MN 13.14.

1199 The following simile is explained at SN 12:63/ii.l00 to
illustrate the nutriment of consciousness ( vinmnahara ).

1200 And he will - at MN 130.17-27.

1201 MA: That is, the fool engages in the three types of mis-
conduct, because of which he is reborn in hell. By the
residue of that kamma, when he comes back to the
human state he is reborn in a low family. Having again
engaged in the three types of misconduct, he is again
reborn in hell.


1336 The Majjhima Nikaya

1202 Although the Pali does not contain the negative particle
na, it seems to be required here to yield the intended
meaning, and it does appear in the parallel clauses of the
following paragraph.

1203 See MN 91.5. The legend of the Wheel-turning Monarch
is treated more extensively in DN 17 and DN 26.

1204 See n.809.

1205 MA: That is, the wise man engages in the three types of
good conduct, because of which he is reborn in heaven.
Returning to the human world, he is reborn in a good
family with wealth and beauty. He engages in the three
types of good conduct and is again reborn in heaven. It
should be noted that the “complete perfection of the wise
man's grade" is entirely mundane and takes no account
of the more excellent stages along the path to liberation.

SLTCTA 130

1206 Yama is the god of death. MA says that he is a king of
spirits possessing a celestial mansion. Sometimes he lives
in his celestial mansion enjoying celestial pleasures,
sometimes he experiences the result of kamma; he is a
righteous king. MA adds that there are in fact four
Yamas, one at each of four gates (of hell?).

1207 According to Buddhist legend, three of the divine mes-
sengers - the old man, the sick man, and the dead man -
appeared to the Bodhisatta while he was living in the
palace, destroying his enchantment with the worldly life
and awakening in him a desire to seek the way to deliv-
erance. See AN 3:38/i.l45-46 for the psychological nu-
cleus out of which the legend must have developed.

1208 The following description of hell, down to §16, is also
found at MN 129.10-16.

SUTTA 131

1209 This discourse with a lengthy introduction and notes is
available separately in a translation by Bhikkhu Nana-
nanda under the title Ideal Solitude.


Notes to Sutta 131 1337


1210 Ms contains the following note by Nm on this expres-
sion, which accounts for the title of this and the following
three suttas:

This term has elsewhere been translated by "true
saint" and like phrases, which, however, quite
miss the point. The commentary says only this:
“Bhaddekarattassa means 'of one who is fortunate
(i bhadda ) in having one (eka) attachment ( ratta or
ratti )'; this is because of his possessing applica-
tion to insight." The subcommentary resolves the
compound ekaratta (one-attachment) into eka
ratti, and says only that ‘‘bhaddekaratta means one
who has a fortunate single attachment ( bhaddo
ekaratto etassa ); it is a term for a person who is
cultivating insight." There appears to be no other
mention of this term elsewhere in the Canon and
its commentaries.

The Pali word ratta (adj.) or ratti (n.) in this
instance is from the root raj, "to take pleasure
in." So the “bhaddekaratta" appears to be the one
who is applying himself invincibly, unshakeably, to
know and to study the present state as it occurs (see
verse). This application of attachment is auspi-
cious or fortunate because it leads to liberation...

It might be supposed that the expression ''bhad-
dekaratta" was a popular phrase taken over by
the Buddha and given a special sense by him, as
was not infrequently done, but there seems to be
no reason to do so and there is no evidence for it
in this case. It is more likely to be a term coined .
by the Buddha himself to describe a certain
aspect of development.

Ven. Nanananda, in the introduction to his translation,
offers an argument for rendering the term "the ideal lover
of solitude." Homer renders it simply as "the Auspicious."

1211 More literally the first two lines would be translated:
"Let not a person run back to the past or live in expecta-
tion of the future." The meaning will be elucidated in the
expository passage of the sutta.



1338 The Majjhima Nikaya


1212 MA: He should contemplate each presently arisen state,
just where it has arisen, with insight into its imperma-
nence, etc.

1213 Asamhlram asankuppam. MA explains that this is said for
the purpose of showing insight and repeated insight; for
insight is "invincible, unshakeable" because it is not van-
quished or shaken by lust and other defilements. Else-
where the expression "the invincible, the unshakeable" is
used as a description of Nibbana (e.g., Sn v.1149) or of
the liberated mind (e.g., Thag v.649), but here it seems to
refer to a stage in the development of insight. The recur-
rence of the verb form samhirati in §8 and §9 suggests
that the intended meaning is contemplation of the pre-
sent moment without being misled into the adoption of a
personality view.

1214 The "Peaceful Sage" (santo muni) is the Buddha.

1215 MA: One "finds delight" by bringing to bear upon the
past either craving or a view associated with craving. It
should be noted that it is not the mere recollection of the
past through memory that causes bondage, but the reliv-
ing of past experiences with thoughts of craving. In this
respect the Buddha's teaching differs significantly from
that of Krishnamurti, who seems to regard memory itself
as the villain behind the scene.

1216 Perhaps this sentence, and all the parallel sentences to
follow, should be translated: "One does not find delight
there thinking, 'I had such material form in the past.'"
The translation as it stands suggests that such thoughts
arise but without the accompaniment of delight, while
the alternative proposed here suggests that these
thoughts do not arise at all. The same alternative con-
struction can also be applied to thoughts about the future
in §7. The Pali can admit either rendering.

1217 Perhaps this phrase should be taken as an exclamation:
"May I have such material form in the future!"

1218 The verb here and in the next paragraph, samhirati, refers
back to the line in the verse, "invincibly, unshakeably."
MA glosses: "One is dragged in by craving and views
because of the lack of insight."


Notes to Suttas 133-135 1339


sutta 133

1219 Down to §12, as at MN 18.10-15.

1220 MA: In the two previous suttas and in the one to follow
the Buddha set up the outline and analysis by way of the
five aggregates, but here he set it up in order for it to be
analysed by way of the twelve sense bases. Understand-
ing the Buddha's intention, Ven. Maha Kaccana spoke as
he did, and because of his skill in grasping the method
even when it was not explicitly shown, the Buddha
appointed him the foremost disciple in explaining in
detail a teaching stated in brief.

SUTTA 134

1221 According to the commentary to Thag, Ven. Lomasakan-
giya had been a bhikkhu in the time of the Buddha
Kassapa. After the Buddha Kassapa had taught the
Bhaddekaratta Sutta, a certain bhikkhu spoke about it to
Lomasakangiya. Unable to understand it, he exclaimed:
"In the future, may I be able to teach you this sutta!" The
other answered: "May I ask you about it!" In the present
age Lomasakangiya was born into a Sakyan family at
Kapilavatthu, while the other bhikkhu became the god
Candana.

1222 MA explains that this occurred in the seventh year after
the Buddha's enlightenment, at the time when he spent
the three months of the rainy season in the heaven of the
Thirty-three teaching the Abhidhamma to the gods who
had assembled from ten thousand world-systems.

SUTTA 135

1223 See MN 99. According to MA, his father, the brahmin
Todeyya, was reborn as a dog in his own house because
of his extreme stinginess. The Buddha identified him to
Subha by getting the dog to dig up some hidden treasure
Subha's father had buried before his death. This inspired
Subha's confidence in the Buddha and moved him to
approach and inquire about the workings of kamma.

1224 If the kamma of killing directly determines the mode of



1340 The Majjhima Nikaya


rebirth, it will produce rebirth in one of the states of
deprivation. But if a wholesome kamma brings about a
human rebirth - and rebirth as a human being is always
the result of wholesome kamma - the kamma of killing
will operate in a manner contrary to that of the rebirth-
generative kamma by causing various adversities that
may reach their peak in a premature death. The same
principle holds for the subsequent cases in which
unwholesome kamma comes to maturity in a human
existence: in each case the unwholesome kamma counter-
acts the wholesome kamma responsible for the human
rebirth by engendering a specific type of misfortune cor-
responding to its own distinctive quality.

1225 In this case the wholesome kamma of abstaining from
killing may be directly responsible for either the heavenly
rebirth or the longevity in a human existence. The same
principle applies in all the passages on the maturation of
wholesome kamma.

SUTTA 136

1226 MA says that Potaliputta did not actually hear this per-
sonally from the Buddha, but had heard a report that
these statements were made by the Buddha. The former
is a distorted version of the Buddha's- declaration at
MN 56.5 that mental action is the most reprehensible of
the three types of deeds for the performance of evil
action. The latter derives from the Buddha's discussion
of the cessation of perception in the Potthapada Sutta
(DN 9). MA glosses the word "vain" by "fruitless."

1227 This statement is made by the Buddha at SN 36:11/ iv.216,
with reference to the suffering inherent in all formations by
reason of their impermanence. Though the statement itself
is true, Samiddhi seems to have misinterpreted it to mean
that all feeling is felt as suffering, which is patently false.

1228 MA: This section is not the expounding of the
Tathagata's knowledge of the great exposition of action,
but the setting up of the outline for the purpose of pre-
senting that exposition.

1229 MA: This too is not the expounding of the knowledge of


Notes to Sutta 136 1341


the great exposition of action, but is still the setting up of
the outline. The purpose here is to show what can be
accepted and what should be rejected in the claims of the
outside reduses and brahmins. Briefly put, the proposi-
tions they put forth reporting their direct observations
can be accepted, but the generalisations they derive from
those observations must be rejected.

1230 Here begins the expounding of the knowledge of the
great exposition of action.

1231 MA: The person who was seen with the divine eye
killing living beings, etc., is reborn in hell because of
another evil deed he had done earlier than the deed of
killing, etc., or because of an evil deed he did afterwards,
or because of a wrong view he accepted at the time of

, death. Although the Pali seems to be saying that he was
necessarily reborn in hell on account of some action other
than the one he was seen performing, this should not be
understood as an apodictic pronouncement but only as a
statement of possibility. That is, while it may be true that
he was reborn in hell because of the evil action he was
seen performing, it is also possible that he was reborn
there because of some other evil action he did earlier or
later or because of wrong view.

1232 This statement shows that even if his evil kamma does
not generate the mode of rebirth, it will still mature for
him in some other way either in this life, in the next life,
or in some more distant future life.

1233 In this case the heavenly rebirth must be due to some
action other than the one he was seen performing, since
an evil action cannot produce a fortunate mode of rebirth.

1234 MA: The first is illustrated by the person who kills living
beings and is reborn in hell: his action is incapable (of
good result) because it is unwholesome, and it appears
incapable because, since he is reborn in hell, it seems to
be the cause for his rebirth there. The second is illustrated
by the person who kills living beings and is reborn in
heaven: his fiction is incapable (of good result) because
it is unwholesome, yet it appears capable because he is
reborn in heaven; thus to the outside recluses and
brahmins it seems to be the cause for his rebirth in heav-


1342 The Majjhima Nikaya


en. The remaining two terms should be understood along
the same lines, with appropriate changes.

SUTTA 137

1235 MA: Mental exploration ( manopavicara ) is applied thought
and sustained thought. One explores (or examines, upa-
vicarati) the object by the occurrence of sustained thought
( vicara ), and applied thought is associated with the latter.

1236 MA: Having seen a form with eye-consciousness, one
explores a form which, as an object, is a cause of joy
(grief, equanimity).

1237 MA: These are positions (pada) for beings who are intent
on the round of existence and for those intent on the ces-
sation of the round.

1238 MA: "Based on the household life" means connected
with the cords of sensual pleasure; "based on renuncia-
tion" means connected with insight.

1239 MA: This is the joy that arises when one has set up
insight and is sitting watching the breakup of formations
with a current of sharp and bright insight knowledge
focused on formations.

1240 MA explains "the supreme liberations" and "that base"
as arahantship. See MN 44.28.

1241 MA: This is the equanimity of unknowing that arises in
one who has not conquered the limitations imposed by
the defilements or the future results (of action). It "does
not transcend the form" because it is stuck, fastened to
the object like flies to a ball of sugar.

1242 MA: This is the equanimity associated with insight
knowledge. It does not become lustful towards desirable
objects that come into range of the senses, nor does it
become angry because of undesirable objects.

1243 MA says that previously worldly equanimity was dis-
cussed, but here the contrast is between the equanimity
in differentiated sense experience and the equanimity of
the meditative attainments.

1244 MA paraphrases: "By the equanimity of the immaterial
attainments, abandon the equanimity of the fine-material
attainments; by insight into the immaterial sphere, aban-
don insight into the fine-material sphere."



Notes to Suttas 137 and 138 1343


1245 MA says that non-identification ( atammayata - see n.1066)
here refers to "insight leading to emergence," i.e., the
insight immediately preceding the arising of the supra-
mundane path; for this effects the abandonment of the
equanimity of the immaterial attainments and the equa-
nimity of insight.

1246 Satipatthana here obviously has a different meaning than
usual, as the sequel will make clear. The "Noble One" is
the Buddha.

1247 This is one of the nine epithets of the Buddha in the usual
enumeration of the Buddha's qualities.

1248 These "eight directions" are the eight liberations, on
which see n.764.

SUTTA 138

1249 It is strange that the Buddha, having announced that he
will teach a summary and an exposition, should recite
only the summary and leave without giving the exposi-
tion. Although elsewhere the Buddha departs suddenly
after making an enigmatic statement (e.g., in MN 18), on
those occasions he had not previously declared his inten-
tion to give an exposition. MA offers no explanation.

1250 MA: Consciousness is "distracted and scattered external-
ly," i.e., among external objects, when it occurs by way of
attachment towards an external object.

1251 MT: The form itself is called the sign of form ( rupanimitta )
in that it is the cause for the arising of defilements. One
"follows after it" by way of lust.

1252 MA: The mind is "stuck internally" by way of attachment
to an internal object. The text of the sutta itself makes the
shift from vinnana in the Buddha's summary to citta in
Maha Kaccana's exposition.

1253 All known editions of the Pali text of MN 138 read here
anupada paritassana, literally "agitation due to non-
clinging," which obviously contradicts what the Buddha
consistently teaches: that agitation arises from clinging,
and ceases with the removal of clinging. However, this
reading apparently precedes the time of the commen-
taries, for MA accepts anupada as correct and offers the fol-
lowing explanation: "In what sense is there agitation due


1344 The Majjhima Nikaya


to non-clinging? Through the non-existence of anything to
cling to. For if there existed any formation that were per-
manent, stable, a self, or the belonging of a self, it would
be possible to cling to it. Then this agitation would be agi-
tation due to clinging (something to cling to). But because
there is no formation that can be clung to thus, then even
though material form, etc., are clung to with the idea
'material form is self/ etc., they are not clung to (in the
way they are conceived). Thus, what is here called 'agita-
tion due to non-clinging' is in meaning agitation due to
clinging by way of views." Nm had followed this reading,
and on the basis of MA's explanation, had rendered the
phrase "anguish [agitation] due to not finding anything to
cling to." He did not discuss the problem in his notes.

A sutta in the Samyutta Nikaya (SN 22:7/iii, 16) is vir-
tually identical with this passage of MN 138, except that
here it reads, as we should expect, upada paritassana, "agi-
tation due to clinging." From the Samyutta text we may
safely infer that the Majjhima reading is an ancient error
that should be discounted. My rendering here is based on
the reading of SN 22:7. Homer too follows the latter text
in MLS.

1254 MA explains the unusual phrase paritassana dham-
masamuppada as "the agitation of craving and the arising
of (other) unwholesome states."

1255 The agitation thus results from the lack of any permanent
essence in things that could provide a refuge from the
suffering precipitated by their change and instability.

1256 This phrase is identical in both the Majjhima and Sam-
yutta versions.

SUTTA 139

1257 This is substantially identical with the proclamation with
which the newly enlightened Buddha opened his first
discourse to the five bhikkhus, before teaching them the
Four Noble Truths.

1258 This is a more complicated expression for the pursuit of
sensual pleasure.

1259 MA: It is "beset by suffering, vexation," etc., through the


Notes to Suttas 139 and 140 1345


suffering and vexation, etc., of its results and the suffer-
ing and vexation, etc., of its attendant defilements.

1260 This is craving for being.

1261 That is, extolling and disparaging come about when one
frames one's statements in terms of persons, some of
whom are praised and others blamed. One teaches "only
the Dhamma" when one frames one's statements in
terms of the state ( dhamma ) - the mode of practice - with-
out explicit references to persons.

1262 This problem of "insistence on local language" must have
been particularly acute in the Sangha, when the bhikkhus
lived a life of constant wandering and had to pass
through many localities each with their distinct dialects.

1263 Ven. Subhuti was the younger brother of Anathapindika
and became a bhikkhu on the day Jeta's Grove was
offered to the Sangha. The Buddha appointed him the
foremost disciple in two categories - those who live with-
out conflict and those who are worthy of gifts.

SUTTA 140

1264 According to MA, Pukkusati had been the king of
Takkasila and had entered into a friendship with King
Bimbisara of Magadha through merchants who travelled
between the two countries for purposes of trade. In an
exchange of gifts Bimbisara sent Pukkusati a golden plate
on which he had inscribed descriptions of the Three
Jewels and various aspects of the Dhamma. When
Pukkusati read the inscription, he was filled with joy and
decided to renounce the world. Without taking formal
ordination, he shaved his head, put on yellow robes, and
left the palace. He went to Rajagaha intending to meet
the Buddha, who was then in Savatthl, about 300 miles
away. The Buddha saw Pukkusati with his clairvoyant
knowledge, and recognising his capacity to attain the
paths and fruits, he journeyed alone on foot to Rajagaha
to meet him. To avoid being recognised, by an act of will
the Buddha caused his special physical attributes such as
the marks of a Great Man to be concealed, and he
appeared just like an ordinary wandering monk. He


1346 The Majjhima Nikaya

arrived at the potter's shed shortly after Pukkusati had
arrived there intending to leave for Savatthl the next day
in order to meet the Buddha.

1265 Pukkusati, unaware that the new arrival is the Buddha,
addresses him by the familiar appellation "avuso.”

1266 MA: The Buddha asked these questions merely as a way
to start a conversation, as he already knew that Puk-
kusati had gone forth on account of himself.

1267 MA: Since Pukkusati had already purified the prelimi-
nary practice of the path and was able to attain the fourth
jhana through mindfulness of breathing, the Buddha
began directly with a talk on insight meditation,
expounding the ultimate voidness that is the foundation
for arahantship.

1268 MA: Here the Buddha expounds the non-truly existent
by way of the truly existent; for the elements are truly
existent but the person is not truly existent. This is
meant: "That which you perceive as a person consists of
six elements. Ultimately there is no person here. 'Person'
is a mere concept."

1269 As at MN 137.8.

1270 PahhadhitthClna, saccadhitthana, cagadhitthana, upasam-
adhitthana. Nm, in Ms, had first rendered adhitthana as
"resolve," and then replaced it with "mode of expres-
sion," neither of which seems suitable for this context.
MA glosses the word with patittha, which clearly means
foundation, and explains the sense of the statement thus:
"This person who consists of the six elements, the six
bases of contact, and the eighteen kinds of mental
approach - when he turns away from these and attains
arahantship, the supreme accomplishment, he does so
established upon these four bases." The four foundations
will be individually elucidated by the sequel, §§12-29.

1271 MA: From the start one should not neglect the wisdom
born of concentration and insight in order to penetrate
through to the wisdom of the fruit of arahantship. One
should preserve truthful speech in order to realise
Nibbana, the ultimate truth. One should cultivate the
relinquishment of defilements in order to accomplish the
relinquishing of all defilements by the path of ara-


Notes to Sutta 140 1347


hantship. From the start one should train in the pacifica-
tion of defilements in order to pacify all defilements by
the path of arahantship. Thus the wisdom, etc., born of
serenity and insight are spoken of as the preliminary
foundations for achieving the foundations of wisdom,
etc. (distinctive of arahantship).

1272 MA: The non-neglecting of wisdom is explained by way
of the meditation on the elements. The analysis of the ele-
ments here is identical with that of MN 28.6, 11, 16, 21
and MN 62.8-12.

1273 MA: This is the sixth element, which "remains" in that it
has yet to be expounded by the Buddha and penetrated
by Pukkusati. Here it is explained as the consciousness
that accomplishes the work of insight contemplation on
the elements. Under the heading of consciousness, the
contemplation of feeling is also introduced.

1274 This passage shows the conditionality of feeling and its
impermanence through the cessation of its condition.

1275 MA identifies this as the equanimity of the fourth jhana.
According to MA, Pukkusati had already achieved the
fourth jhana and had a strong attachment to it. The
Buddha first praises this equanimity to inspire Puk-
kusati's confidence, then he gradually leads him to the
immaterial jhanas and the attainment of the paths and
fruits.

1276 The sense is: If he attains the base of infinite space and
should pass away while still attached to it, he would be
reborn in the plane of infinite space and would live there
for the full lifespan of 20,000 aeons specified for that
plane. In the higher three immaterial planes the lifespan is
respectively 40,000 aeons, 60,000 aeons, and 84,000 aeons.

1277 MA: This is said in order to show the danger in the
immaterial jhanas. By the one phrase, "This would be
conditioned," he shows: "Even though the lifespan there
is 20,000 aeons, that is conditioned, fashioned, built up. It
is thus impermanent, unstable, not lasting, transient. It is
subject to perishing, breaking up, and dissolution; it is
involved with birth, ageing, and death, grounded upon
suffering. It is not a shelter, a place of safety, a refuge.
Having passed away there as a worldling, one can still be




1348 The Majjhima Nikaya


reborn in the four states of deprivation."

1278 So n'eva abhisankharoti nabhisahcetayati bhavaya va
vibhavaya. The two verbs suggest the notion of volition as
a constructive power that builds up the continuation of
conditioned existence. Ceasing to will for either being or
non-being shows the extinction of craving for eternal
existence and annihilation, culminating in the attainment
of arahantship.

1279 MA says that at this point Pukkusati penetrated three
paths and fruits, becoming a non-returner. He realised
that his teacher was the Buddha himself, but he could not
express his realisation since the Buddha still continued
with his discourse.

1280 This passage shows the arahant's abiding in the Nibbana
element with a residue remaining (of the factors of condi-
tioned existence, sa-upadisesa nibbanadhatu). Though he
continues to experience feelings, he is free from lust
towards pleasant feeling, from aversion towards painful
feeling, and from ignorance about neutral feeling.

1281 That is, he continues to experience feeling only as long
as the body with its life faculty continues, but not
beyond that.

1282 This refers to his attainment of the Nibbana-element
with no residue remaining ( anupadisesa nibbanadhatu) -
the cessation of all conditioned existence with his final
passing away. «

1283 This completes the exposition of the first foundation,
which began at §13. MA says that the knowledge of the
destruction of all suffering is the wisdom pertaining to
the fruit of arahantship.

1284 MA mentions four kinds of attachment ( upadhi ) here:
see n.674.

1285 The "tides of conceiving" ( mahhussava ), as the following
paragraph will show, are thoughts and notions originat-
ing from the three roots of conceiving - craving, conceit,
and views. For a fuller explanation, see n.6. The "sage at
peace" ( muni santo) is the arahant.

1286 That which is not present in him is craving for being,
which leads those who have not eradicated it back to a
new birth following death.


Notes to Suttas 140-142 1349


1287 MA says that he was reborn in the Pure Abode called
Aviha and attained arahantship as soon as he took
rebirth there. It quotes a verse from the Sariygrtta Nikaya
(SN l:50/i.35) mentioning Pukkusati as one of seven
bhikkhus who were reborn in Aviha and attained deliv-
erance by transcending the celestial bonds.

sutta 141

1288 This refers to the Buddha's first sermon, delivered to the
five bhikkhus in the Deer Park at Isipatana.

1289 MA: Ven. Sariputta trains them until he knows they have
attained the fruit of stream-entry, then he lets them
develop the higher paths on their own and he takes on a
new batch of pupils. But Ven. Moggallana continues to
train his pupils until they have attained arahantship.

1290 The definitions of birth, ageing, and death are also found
at MN 9.22, 26. This entire detailed analysis of the Four
Noble Truths is included in the Mahasatipatthana Sutta,
with an even more elaborate exposition of the second
and third truths. See DN 22.18-21/ii.305-13.

SUTTA 142

1291 Mahapajapatx GotamI was the younger sister of Queen
Mahamaya, the Buddha's mother, and was also the wife of
King Suddhodana. After Mahamaya's death, she became
the Buddha's foster mother. The present sutta takes place
at an early point in the Buddha's ministry, on one of his
return visits to his native city. After King Suddhodana's
death, Mahapajapatl pleaded with the Buddha to admit
women into the Sangha, and her acceptance marked the
beginning of the BhikkhunI Sangha, the Order of Nuns.
The story is found at Vin Cv Kh 10/ ii . 253-56 (see
Nanamoli, The Life of the Buddha, pp. 104r-7).

1292 MA: The Buddha asked her to give the gift to the Sangha
because he wanted her volition of generosity to be directed
both to the Sangha and to himself, as the combined voli-
tion would yield merit conducive to her welfare and hap-
piness for a long time to come. He also said this in order


1350 The Majjhima Nikaya


that later generations would be inspired to show respect
towards the Sangha, and by supporting the Sangha with
the four physical requisites would contribute towards the
longevity of the Dispensation.

1293 These are the four factors of stream-entry. Thus it is clear
that at the time this sutta takes place, Mahapajapatl
GotamI was already a st ream-enterer.

1294 MA: The Buddha undertakes this teaching because the
sutta began with a personal gift presented to him, and he
wishes to make clear the comparative value of personal
gifts and gifts offered to the Sangha.

1295 MA and MT explain that this term can be loosely extend-
ed to include even a lay follower who has gone for refuge
to the Triple Gem, as well as lay people and monks intent
on fulfilling the moral training and the practice of con-
centration and insight. In the strict technical sense it
refers only to those possessing the supramundane path
of stream-entry.

1296 This is a non-Buddhist contemplative who attains the
jhanas and the mundane kinds of direct knowledge.

1297 MA: In a hundred existences it gives long life, beauty,
happiness, strength, and intelligence, and it makes one
free of agitation. The following attainments should be
understood accordingly.

1298 MA says that although the results of' giving in each of
these cases is incalculable, there is still an ascending gra-
dation in their incalculability, similar to the ascending
incalculability of the waters in a great river, etc., up to
that of the waters in the ocean. Perhaps the "incalculable,
immeasurable" value of these gifts consists in their
becoming a supporting condition for attainment of the
paths, fruits, and Nibbana.

1299 MA: There is no gift equal in measure to this gift. This is
the kind of gift Mahapajapatl would be giving by offer-
ing the pair of cloths to the Sangha.

1300 MA: "Members of the clan" (gotmbhuno) are those who
are monks merely in name. They will go about with a
piece of yellow cloth tied around their necks or arms, and
will support their wives and children by engaging in
trade and farming, etc.

1301 The gift is incalculable and immeasurable in value


Notes to Suttas 142 and 143 1351


because it is offered, by way of the intention of the
donor, not to the "yellow-necks" as individuals but to the
Sangha as a corporate whole. Thus the recipient body
includes all the virtuous bhikkhus of the past, even those
who have long passed away.

1302 MA states that a gift offered to an immoral bhikkhu
taken to represent the entire Sangha is more fruitful than
a gift offered on a personal basis to an arahant. But for
the gift to be properly presented to the Sangha, the donor
must take no account of the personal qualities of the
recipient but must see him solely as representing the
Sangha as a whole.

1303 MA: Here the word "purified" has the meaning "made
fruitful."

1304 MA: This last verse refers to the gift one arahant gives to
another arahant. Although the arahant believes in the
fruit of kamma, because he is without desire and lust for
existence his own act of giving is not productive of any
fruits. It is a mere functional action ( kiriya ) that leaves no
traces behind.

SUTTA 143

1305 MA says that dinging to the eye takes place by way of
desire and lust; consciousness is dependent on the eye by
way of craving and views. However, since Anatha-
pindika was already a stream-enterer, dependence for
him would have involved only craving, views having
been eradicated by the path of stream-entry.

1306 This statement does not imply that there is any inherent
exclusiveness or arbitrary discrimination in the Buddha’s
way of presenting his teaching. But as those who remain
in lay life must look after their families, possessions, and
occupations, such talk leading to complete detachment
would not have been appropriate for them.

SUTTA 144

1307 This is an elliptical expression for committing suicide.

1308 By making this statement he is implicitly claiming ara-
hantship, as will be made clear at §13. Whether his claim


1352 The Majjhima Nikaya


at this point was valid or not is uncertain, the commen-
tary regarding it as a case of self-overestimation.

1309 MA says that Ven. Maha Cunda gave him this instruc-
tion thinking that he must still be an ordinary person,
since he could not endure the deadly pains and wanted
to commit suicide.

1310 The sense of this instruction might be explained with the
help of MA thus: One is dependent because of craving
and views and becomes independent by abandoning
them with the attainment of arahantship. Bias ( nati , lit.
bending) comes about through craving, and its absence
means there is no inclination or desire for existence.
There is no coming and going by the ending of rebirth
and death, no here nor beyond nor in between by the
transcendence of this world, the world beyond, and the
passage between one and the other. This is the end of the
suffering of defilements and the suffering of the round.

1311 MA: He cut his throat, and just at that moment the fear of
death descended on him and the sign of future rebirth
appeared. Recognising that he was still an ordinary per-
son, he was aroused and developed insight. Compre-
hending the formations, he attained arahantship just
before he expired.

1312 MA: Although the Ven. Channa was still an ordinary
person at the time he made the declaration, because he
attained final Nibbana immediately afterwards, the
Buddha spoke thus referring to that same declaration.

1313 Upavajjakulani. It seems from MA and MT that Channa
had associated closely with his lay supporters in ways
that were not proper for a monk, and even though he
was intent on the right practice, this intimacy had
aroused suspicion within the Sangha.

1314 This statement seems to imply that Channa was an ara-
hant at the time he committed suicide, though the com-
mentary explains otherwise.

SUITA 145

1315 This Punna is a different person from Punna Mantani-
putta of MN 24. He was from a family of merchants
residing in the port city of Supparaka in the Sunaparanta


Notes to Suttas 145 and 146 1353


country (present-day Maharashtra). On a business trip to
Savatthl he heard the Buddha give a discourse and
renounced the home life to become a bhikkhu.

1316 MA explains this instruction as a short teaching on the
Four Noble Truths. Delight (nandt) is an aspect of crav-
ing. Through the arising of delight in regard to the eye
and forms there arises the suffering of the five aggre-
gates. Thus in this first part of the instruction the Buddha
teaches the round of existence by way of the first two
truths - suffering and its origin - as they occur through
the six senses. In the second part (§4) he teaches the end-
ing of the round by way of the second two truths - cessa-
tion and the path - expressed as the abandoning of
delight in the six senses and their objects.

1317 That is, he expired. Since the Buddha still refers to Punna
as a clansman ( kulaputta ), he must have died within a
short time after returning to the Sunaparanta country.
The texts leave no record of how he died.

SUTTA 146

1318 One of the eight important rules laid down by the
Buddha when he established the Bhikkhuni Sangha stip-
ulated that every fortnight the bhikkhunls should request
the bhikkhus to send a bhikkhu for the purpose of giving
them an exhortation. According to MA, in a previous life
Ven. Nandaka had been a king and those bhikkhunls had
been his concubines. He wanted to avoid his turn in
advising the bhikkhunls because he thought that another
bhikkhu possessing the knowledge of past lives, seeing
him giving an exhortation surrounded by the
bhikkhunls, would think that he still could not separate
himself from his former concubines. But the Buddha saw
that Nandaka's discourse to the bhikkhunls would bene-
fit them and thus he requested him to instruct them.

1319 MA: They have seen this with the wisdom of insight.

1320 Tajjam tajjam paccayam paticca tajja tajja vedana uppajjanti.
The coming together of the eye, forms, and eye-conscious-
ness is eye-contact, and this is the primary condition for
the arising of feeling bom of eye-contact. With the cessa-
tion of the eye, one of the factors responsible for eye-con-


1354 The Majjhima Nikaya


tact is removed. Thus eye-contact ceases, and with its ces-
sation the feeling bom of eye-contact also ceases.

1321 MA: 9 He undertakes this teaching on the enlightenment
factors because wisdom is not able to cut away the defile-
ments by itself, but only when accompanied by the other
six enlightenment factors (wisdom being equivalent to
the investigation-of-states enlightenment factor).

1322 MA: She who was last in regard to good qualities had
become a stream-enterer, but those whose intentions
were to become once-returners, non-returners, and ara-
hants each achieved the fulfilment of their intentions.
Because of these results, the Buddha named Ven.
Nandaka the foremost bhikkhu in instructing the
bhikkhurus.

SUTTA 147

1323 MA says that this discourse was spoken to Rahula
shortly after his higher ordination, presumably at the
age of twenty.

1324 Vimuttiparipdcamyd dhamma. MA mentions fifteen states
that ripen in deliverance: the five spiritual faculties; the
five penetrative insights - into impermanence, suffering,
non-self, abandoning, and fading away; and the five
things taught to Meghiya - noble friendship, virtue, ben-
eficial discussion, energy, and wisdom (see AN 9:3/
iv.356;Ud 4:1/36).

1325 MA says that these deities, who came from various celes-
tial realms, had been companions of Rahula's during the
previous life in which he first made the aspiration to
attain arahantship as the son of a Buddha.

1326 It should be noted that the last four items mentioned are
the four mental aggregates. Thus this discourse covers
not only the sense bases but also the five aggregates, the
aggregate of material form being implied by the physical
sense faculties and their objects.

1327 According to MA, stream-entry was the minimal attain-
ment of those deities, but some attained the higher paths
and fruits up to arahantship.


Notes to Suttas 147 and 148 1355


sutta 148

1328 This string of epithets, usually descriptions of the
Dhamma as a whole, here serves to emphasise the impor-
tance of the discourse the Buddha is about to deliver.

1329 The last two clauses in this sequence are also found in the
standard formulation of dependent origination, which is
thus implicitly incorporated into this discourse on the six
sets of six.

1330 The verb upapajjati (the PTS ed. reading, uppajjati, is an
error), normally means "reappears" or "is reborn," but it
also has a special usage in logic whereby it means "to be
tenable, to be acceptable," as it does here.

1331 The argument derives the principle of non-self from the
verifiable premise of impermanence. The structure of the
argument may be briefly set out thus: Whatever is self
must be permanent; X is directly perceived to be imperma-
nent, i.e., marked by rise and fall; therefore X is not self.

1332 The full argument of the previous paragraph is repeated
for each of the remaining five terms in each set of six.

1333 MA explains that this passage is stated to show two noble
truths - suffering and its origin - by way of the three
obsessions (gaha ). The truth of suffering is shown by the
term "personality," elsewhere explicated as the five aggre-
gates affected by clinging (MN 44.2). The three obsessions
are craving, conceit, and views, which respectively give
rise to the notions "mine," "I am" and "my self." The two
truths together constitute the round of existence.

1334 MA: This passage is stated to show the other two noble
truths - cessation and the path - by the repudiation of
the three obsessions. These two truths constitute the end-
ing of the round.

1335 MA: This passage shows the round of existence once
again, this time by way of the underlying tendencies. On
the underlying tendencies and their correlation with the
three types of feeling, see MN 44.25-28.

1336 MA: The first-mentioned ignorance is only the lack of
understanding of the origination, etc., of neither-painful-
nor-pleasant feeling. The second-mentioned is the igno-
rance that is at the root of the round.

1337 MA: There is nothing wonderful in the fact that sixty


1356 The Majjhima Nikaya


bhikkhus attained arahantship when the Buddha first
taught this sutta. But each time Sariputta, Moggallana,
and the eighty great disciples taught it, sixty bhikkhus
attained arahantship. In Sri Lanka the Elder Maliyadeva
taught this sutta in sixty places, and each time sixty
bhikkhus attained arahantship. But when the Elder
Tipitaka Culanaga taught this sutta to a vast assembly of
humans and gods, at the end of the discourse a thousand
bhikkhus attained arahantship, and among the gods only
one remained a worldling.

sutta 149

1338 MA: When one does not know and see the eye by way of
insight knowledge and path knowledge.

1339 That is, the craving that arises and settles on the eye and
forms, etc., holds to them with clinging, and this brings
about an accumulation of kamma that tends to generate a
new set of five aggregates in the next existence.

1340 When one knows and sees the eye by insight and the path.

1341 The eight factors of the path mentioned here seem to
pertain to the preliminary or mundane portion of the
path. MT identifies them with the factors possessed by a
person at the highest level of insight development,
immediately prior to the emergence of the supramun-
dane path. In this stage only the former five path factors
are actively operative, the three factors of the morality
group having been purified prior to the undertaking of
insight meditation. But when the supramundane path
arises, all eight factors occur simultaneously, the three
factors of the morality group exercising the function of
eradicating the defilements responsible for moral trans-
gression in speech, action, and livelihood.

1342 MA says that this refers to the simultaneous arising of
serenity and insight in the supramundane path. The for-
mer is present under the heading of right concentration,
the latter under the heading of right view.

1343 These are the four functions exercised by the supramun-
dane path: fully understanding the truth of suffering,
abandoning the cause of suffering, realising the cessation


Notes to Suttas 149 and 151 1357


of suffering, and developing the path leading to the end
of suffering.

1344 Here serenity and insight represent the entire Noble
Eightfold Path.

1345 MA identifies "true knowledge" with the knowledge of
the path of arahantship, "deliverance" with the fruit of
arahantship. Here these take the place usually reserved
for Nibbana, the true cessation of suffering.

1346 This passage and each of the following passages repeat
the entire text of §§9-11, the only change being in the
sense faculty and object.

SUTTA 151

1347 MA: The arahant's fruition attainment of voidness. See
n.458 and n.1144.

1348 MA: This is the abiding of such great men ( mahdpurisa ) as
Buddhas, paccekabuddhas, and the great disciples of the
Tathagatas.

1349 Among the five terms, desire and lust are synonymous as
are hate and aversion.

1350 Beginning with this section a sequence of development
may be discerned. The abandoning of the five cords of
sensual pleasure is the preliminary step for developing
the jhanas, and the abandoning of the five hindrances
(§10) the immediate antecedent to the attainment of the
first jhana. The full understanding of the five aggregates
(§11) indicates the insight wisdom necessary to attain the
path of stream-entry, and the sections on the thirty-seven
requisites of enlightenment (§§12-18) the cultivation of
the factors needed to arrive at the intermediate stages of
sanctity. The section on serenity and insight (§19), though
applicable to all stages, can be seen as fully actualised by
the non-returner striving for arahantship. Finally, the sec-
tion on true knowledge and deliverance signifies the
attainment of the path and fruit of arahantship.

1351 Although the arahant, who has fully realised true knowl-
edge and deliverance, has no need for further training, he
continues to cultivate serenity and insight in order to
enter into the bliss of the jhanas, the fruition attainment of


1358 The Majjhima Nikaya


arahantship, and the cessation of perception and feeling.

SUTTA 152

1352 The expression "the development of the faculties"
( indriyabhavana ) properly signifies the development of the
mind in responding to the objects experienced through
the sense faculties. The more rudimentary aspect of this
practice, the restraint of the sense faculties ( indriya -
samvara), involves controlling the mind in such a way
that one does not grasp at the "signs and features" of
things, their distinctive attractive and repulsive attributes.
The development of the faculties carries this process of
control through to the point where, by an act of will, one
can immediately set up insight even in the course of
sense perception. At the highest level one acquires the
ability to radically transform the subjective significance
of perceptual objects themselves, making them appear in
a mode that is the very opposite of the way they are nor-
mally apprehended.

1353 MA explains that when a desirable form comes into
range of the eye, an agreeable state ( manapa ) arises;
when an undesirable form appears, a disagreeable state
( amanapa ) arises; and when an indifferent form appears,
a state that is both agreeable and disagreeable arises. It
should be noted ‘that though these three terms are ordi-
narily used to qualify the sense objects, here they also
seem to signify subtle states of liking, aversion, and dull
indifference that arise due to the influence of the under-
lying tendencies. MT identifies "the agreeable" with
wholesome and unwholesome states of mind associated
with joy, "the disagreeable" with unwholesome states of
mind associated with grief (displeasure), and "the
agreeable and disagreeable" with states of mind associat-
ed with equanimous feeling.

1354 MA: This equanimity is the equanimity of insight {viyas-
san'upekkha). The bhikkhu does not allow his mind to be
overcome by lust, hate, or delusion, but comprehends the
object and sets up insight in the neutral state. MT
explains this to mean that he enters into equanimity
regarding formations ( sankhar'upekkha ), a particular stage


Notes to Sutta 152 1359


of insight knowledge (see Vsm XXI, 61-66).

1355 MT: The noble development of the faculties is the sup-
pression of lust, etc., arisen through the eye, and the
establishment of the equanimity of insight.

1356 The same simile appears at MN 66.16.

1357 Although the sekha has already entered upon the way to
final deliverance, he is still prone to subtle states of lik-
ing, aversion, and dull indifference in regard to sense
objects. He experiences these, however, as impediments
to his progress, and thus becomes ashamed, humiliated,
and disgusted by them.

1358 Ariya bhdvitindriya: the arahant is meant.

1359 Since the arahant has eradicated all the defilements along
with their underlying tendencies, in this passage the
three terms - the agreeable, etc. - must be understood
simply as the feelings that arise through contact with
sense objects, and not as the subtle traces of liking, aver-
sion, and indifference relevant to the preceding passage.

1360 The Patisambhidamagga calls this practice "the noble
supernormal power" ( ariya iddhi) and explains it thus
(ii-212) : To abide perceiving the unrepulsive in the
repulsive, one pervades a repulsive being with loving-
kindness, or one attends to a repulsive object (either ani-
mate or inanimate) as a mere assemblage of impersonal
elements. To abide perceiving the repulsive in the unre-
pulsive, one pervades a (sensually) attractive person with
the idea of the foulness of the body, or one attends to an
attractive object (either animate or inanimate) as imper-
manent. The third and fourth methods involve the appli-
cation of the first and second contemplations to both
repulsive and unrepulsive objects, without discrimina-
tion. The fifth method involves the avoidance of joy and
sorrow in response to the six sense objects, thus enabling
one to abide in equanimity, mindful and fully aware.

Although this fivefold contemplation is ascribed to the
arahant as a power perfectly under his control, elsewhere
the Buddha teaches it to bhikkhus still in training as a
way to overcome the three unwholesome roots. See
AN 5:144/iii. 169-70; and for a thoughtful commentary
on that sutta, see Nyanaponika Thera, The Roots of Good
and Evil, pp. 73-78.



Pali-English Glossary


This glossary includes only (a) important doctrinal terms, and
(b) words and meanings not found in the PTS's Pali-English
Dictionary. The latter, compiled by Ven. Nanamoli in a section of
his manuscript, are here marked by an asterisk and are followed
by references to the Majjhima passage where they occur. All
terms are defined only by way of the meanings they bear in the
Majjhima Nikaya, and no account is taken of meanings they
may have in other Buddhist texts. The Pali words are listed here
in Indian alphabetical order.


Pali

English

akalika

immediately effective

akiriyavada

doctrine of non-doing

akuppa

unshakeable

akusala

unwholesome

*akkhayati

to be plain (evident) (11.13)

anga

factor

angana

blemish

*accadaya

overlapping (39.10; 53.10; 107.6; 125.18)

*accokkattha

too low (91.19)

ajjhatta

internal(ly)

ajjhosana

holding

anna

final knowledge

atthana

impossibility

*atammayata

non-identification (113.21; 137.20)

*atinameti

to exceed (the right amount) (91.14)

*atinijjhayitatta

excessive meditation (128.26)

*atipateti

to shoot across (12.62)

atimana

arrogance

attakilamatha

self-mortification

attabhava

individuality


1361


1362 The Majjhima Nikaya


Pali

English

atta

self

attha

(1) meaning; (2) purpose; (3) good

atthangama

disappearance

adukkhamasukha

neither-painful-nor-pleasant

adosa

non-hate

*adduva

knee (91.10)

adhikarana

litigation

adhicitta

higher mind

adhitthana

(1) decision; (2) foundation

adhimana

overestimation

adhimuccati

to resolve upon

adhivasana

endurance

*adhisallekhata

too exacting (66.7)

anagdriya

homelessness

anatta

not self

*anapdya

unrepelled (111.4; 112.4)

anagamin

non-returner

anicca

impermanent

animitta

signless

anissita

independent

anukampa

compassion

anupassand

contemplation

*anupaya

unattracted (111.4; 112.4)

anubyanjana

feature

anusaya

underlying tendency

anussati

recollection

anussava

oral tradition

*anvakdri

flung (86.6)

*anvagameti «

to follow after (131.3)

*apakattHa

too loose (91.19)

apadana

attribute (129.2)

apaya

state of deprivation

*appativibhattabhogin

one who shares without reservation
(48.6; 104.21)

appanihita

desireless

*appabaddha

coherent (32.4)

appamana

immeasurable

appamada

diligence

*abbydyeyya

would pull out (105.19)

abyapada

non-ill will

abhijjha

covetousness

abhinna

direct knowledge

abhinandati

to delight in

*abhinipphajjati

to come to, to be achieved (13.9)


Glossary 1363


Pali

English

*abhinipphanna

achieved, produced (101.28)

abhinivesa

adherence

abhibhayatana -

base for transcendence

abhibhu

overlord

abhivadati

to welcome, to affirm

abhisankhata

conditioned

abhisankharoti

to generate, to perform

abhisahcetayita

volitionally produced

abhisamaya

penetration

amata

deathless

amanasikara

inattention

amaravikkhepa

eel-wriggling

amoha

non-delusion

ayoniso

unwise

arati

discontent

*araha{i

to be proper (95.8)

arahant

untranslated: (1) a liberated person;
(2) accomplished. Accomplished (

ariya

noble, noble one

ariyasacca

noble truth

ariyasdvaka

noble disciple

arupa

immaterial

alobha

non-greed

avacara

sphere

*avadhana

giving (ear) (95.30)

*avaloketi

to turn to look (91.10)

avijja

ignorance

*avisarin

euphonious (91.21)

avihimsa

non-cruelty

aveccappasada

perfect confidence

asankhata

unconditioned

asappurisa

untrue man

asamaya

perpetual

asamayika

perpetual

asita

sickle (96.10)

asubha

foulness

asura

titan

asekha

one beyond training

asmimana

the conceit "I am"

assada

gratification

ahankara

I-making

akasa

space

akasanancayatana

base of infinite space


1364 The Majjhima Nikaya


Pali

English -

akincanna

nothingness

akincannayatana

base of nothingness

*acariyaka

teacher's doctrine (26.15; 79.8)

ajwa

livelihood

adtnava

danger

anapanasati

mindfulness of breathing

anenja

imperturbable

apatti

offence

*apadetar

nurse (141.5)

apo

water

abhicetasika

pertaining to the higher mind

*atnanda

gallnut (120.12)

amisa

material thing, worldly

ayatana

base

*ayatika

having as a basis (122.18)

ayu

life, life-term, vitality

aruppa

immaterial, immaterial realm

alaya

worldliness

asava

taint

*ahahcam

I will beat (26.25)

*ahattar

one who brings (89.18)

ahtlra

nutriment

*icchati

to stir (28.22)

ihjita

perturbable

iddhabhisankhara

feat of supernormal power

iddhi

(1) supernormal power; (2) spiritual
power; (3) success

iddhipada

basis for spiritual power

indriya

faculty

iriyapatha

posture

issa

envy

uccheda

annihilation

*uttararani

upper fire-stick (36.17; 93.11; 126.13)

uttarimanussadhamma

superhuman state

udayabbaya

rise and fall

uddhacca

restlessness

*upakari

bastion (13.13)

upakkilesa

imperfection

*upadussati

to resent (135.11)

*upadha

cushion (12.45)

upadhi

(1) attachment; (2) object of attachment

upanaha

revenge

*upapajjati

also: to be tenable (148.10)


Glossary 1365


Pali

English

upapatti

reappearance (by way of rebirth)

*upavicarati

to explore (137.8)

upavicara

mental exploration

*upasankamitar

one who approaches, visitor (12.30)

upasama

peace

upasampada

full admission (to Sangha)

upadana

clinging

upadinna

clung-to

upayasa

despair

upasaka

man lay follower

upasika

woman lay follower

upekkha

equanimity

ubbilla

elation

usma

heat

*ussata

eminent (not as in PED) (82.28)

ussolh,i

enthusiasm

*urunda

large enough (140.3)

ekaggata

unification (of mind)

ekatta

unity

ekayana

direct, going in one direction

ekodibhava

singleness (of mind)

*etaparama

at most (12.52)

*okkappaniya

believable (36.45)

ottappa

fear of wrongdoing

*odhasta

lying ready (21.7; 119.31)

*opakkama

due to exertion (101.14)

*oparambha

censurable (88.8)

obhasa

light

katha

talk

kappa

aeon

kamma

action

kammanta

action

karuna

compassion

*kalabhaga

fraction (129.9)

kalyana

good

kasina

untranslated: meditation device

*kasimana

emaciation (12.52; 25.9)

*kakatidayin

open to crows (66.11)

kama

(1) sensual pleasure; (2) sensual desire;
(3) sense-sphere (being)

kamaguna

cord of sensual pleasure



1366 The Majjhima Nikaya


Pali

English

kamacchanda

sensual desire

kaya

body

kayasakkhin

body-witness

*kisora

foal (93.14)

*kukkuka

fruit-bud core (of plantain tree) (35.22)

kukkucca

remorse

kusala

wholesome

*ko

also: where (81.20; 93.18)

kodha

anger

kopa

anger

khattiya

noble (caste)

khanti

(1) forbearance; *(2) acceptance (of a
view) (22.11; 70.23; 95.14)

khandha

aggregate, mass

khaya

destruction

*kharigata

solidified (28.6; 62.8; 140.14)

*khtna

also: sharp (139.10)

*khuraka

prancing (65.33)

khurappa

hoof-tipped (kind of arrowhead) (63.5)

*khulukhulukdraka

making a splashing noise (91.15)

gana

group, company

gati

(1) destination; (2) retentiveness

*gamandala

village lout (93.18)

gocara

resort

*cangarava *

sieve (23.2)

carana

conduct

*carasa

prowling (66.6)

caga

(1) generosity; (2) relinquishment

citta

mind

cittuppada

inclination of mind

*ctlTma

tendon (146.11)

clvara

robe

cuti

passing away

cetana

volition

ceto

mind, heart

cetokhila

wilderness in heart

cetovimutti

deliverance of mind


chanda

chambhitatta


(1) desire; (2) zeal
fear


Glossary 1367


Pali

English

jam

ageing

jagariya

wakefulness

jati

birth

*jatibhumi

native land (24.2)

*jdpeti

to fine (caus. of jahati) (35.12; 89.13)

jlva

soul

jivita

life

jhana

(1) untranslated: meditative absorption;
(2) meditation

*natta

renown (47.8)

ndna

knowledge

fiaya

true way

thana

(1) state; (2) possibility

takka

reasoning

*tacchati

to pare, to plane (5.31; 130.12)

tanha

craving

tathagata

untranslated: Thus Come One, Thus
Gone One

tiracchanakatha

pointless talk

tiracchanayoni

animal realm

tulana

scrutiny

*tulini

silky (21.18)

tejo

fire

*telamasikata

dirty, oily (75.23)

thambha

obstinacy

thina

sloth

daratha

disturbance

dassana

seeing, vision

darn

giving, gift

dittha

seen

ditthi

view

ditthitthana

standpoint for views

ditthippatta

one attained-to-view

dibbacakkhu

divine eye

dibbasota

divine ear

*dukkarakdrika

performance of austerities (12.56; 26.27)

dukkha

suffering, pain, painful



1368 The Majjhima Nikaya


Pali

English -

duggati

bad destination

duccarita

misconduct

*dutthulla

inertia (64.9; 127.16; 128.21)

*dubbaca

difficult to admonish (15.2)

deva

god

devatd

deity

devaduta

divine messenger

domanassa

grief

dosa

hate

dhamma

(1) untranslated: the Buddha's teaching;
(2) things, states, factors; (3) mind-
objects; (4) qualities; (5) teachings; (6)
(as suffix) subject to

dhammavicaya

investigation-of-states

dhammanusarin

Dhamma-follower

dhatu

element

*dhutta

(brewer's) mixer (35.5; 56.7)

dhuva

everlasting

natthikavada

nihilism

nandt

delight

*narassika

manly (91.29)

nanatta

diversity

nama

mentality

namarupa

mentality-materiality

nicca

permanent

*niccakappam

constantly (144.11)

nittha

e (1) goal; (2) conclusion

nibbana

untranslated: final deliverance from
suffering

nibbidd

disenchantment

nimitta

(1) sign; (2) basis

*nimmathita

kindled (90.12)

niraya

hell

niramisa

unworldly

nirodha

cessation

*nisevita

scraping (27.10)

nissarana

escape

nissita

dependent

*nihanim

instituted (aor.) (83.21)

mvarana

hindrance

*ruhata

faultless (140.20)

nekkhamma

renunciation


Glossary 1369


Pali

nevasannanasann-

ayatana

paccanubhoti

paccaya

paccavekkhana

paccekabuddha

paja

patina

pannavimutta

pannavimutti

*patikaroti

patikkula

patigha

paticca satnuppada

patinissagga

patipada

*pativanarupa

*pativeti

patisallana

*patthita

pathavX

pamta

*panopanavidha

pandita

*pandumutika

*padumaka

padhana

papanca

*papatati

pabbajja

pabhava

*pabhavika

*pabhivatta

pamada

paramasa

*parikkamana

parikkhara

*parikkhepeti

pariggaha

parinna

paritassana

parideva


English

base of neither-perception-nor-non-
perception

to experience
condition

reviewing, reflection

untranslated: a solitary enlightened one

generation

wisdom

one liberated-by-wisdom
deliverance by wisdom
to carry out (instructions), to obey
(125.12)
repulsive

(1) sensory impact; (2) aversion

dependent origination

relinquishment

(1) way, practice; (2) progress

disappointed (104.2)

to disappear (111.4)

meditation

gone out (12.49)

earth

sublime

haggling, bargaining (70.26)

wise, wise man

(rice) stored in a sheaf (81.16)

(kind of wood) (93.11)
striving
proliferation
to flee (12.48)

going forth (into homelessness)

production

arising from (87.3)

selected (81.18)

negligence

adherence

avoidance (8.14)

requisite

to utterly destroy (35.21)

possession

full understanding

agitation

lamentation


1370 The Majjhima Nikaya


Pali

English ■

] parinibbana

(1) final Nibbana; (2) extinguishing

paribbajaka

wanderer

pariyutthana

obsession

pariyesana

search

palasa

domineering

*pavattika

ornamental chain (140.20)

*pavana

wilds (of forest) (19.25; 26.34)

paviveka

seclusion

pasada

confidence

passaddhi

tranquillity

pahana

abandonment

pahitatta

resolute

*patipuggalika

personal, for a particular person (142.5)

pana

living being

pmatipata

killing living beings

*panupeta

for life (until the end of one's life) (4.35)

*patavyata

gulping down (45.3)

patimokkha

untranslated: code of monastic rules

papa

evil

papiccha

evil desire

pamojja

gladness

paraim

perfection

paripuri

fulfilment

parisuddhi

purification

*pasadaniya

inspiring, pleasing (89.4)

pindapata

almsfood

pisuna vaca

malicious speech

piti

rapture

puggah

* person

punna

merit

puthujjana

ordinary person

punabbhava

renewal of being

pubbenivasa

past life

*purindada

first of givers (56.29)

peta

ghost

pharati

to pervade

pharusa vaca

harsh speech

phala

fruit, fruition

phassa

contact

*baddha

imprisoned (39.14)

*bandha

imprisonment (19.7)

*bandhana

imprisonment (39.14)


Glossary 1371


Pali

English

bala

power

bahiddhd

extemal(ly)

bahullkata

cultivated

bahussuta

learned

bala

fool

*bahulika

luxurious (26.26)

buddha

(1) untranslated; (2) enlightened.
Enlightened One

bojjhanga

enlightenment factor

bodhisatta

untranslated: a future Buddha

byahjana

phrasing

byapada

ill will

*byabangi

carrying-pole (96.10)

brahmacariya

holy life, celibacy

brahmavihara

divine abode

brahma

untranslated: (1) supreme God (for
brahmins); (2) class of deities (for
Buddhists)

brahmana

brahmin (caste)

bhagava

blessed. Blessed One

bhaya

fear

bhava

being

*bhavyata

ability (119.29)

bhavana

development

bhavita

developed

bhikkhu

untranslated: Buddhist monk

bhikkhunT

untranslated: Buddhist nun

bhuta

(1) a being; (2) what has come to be

makkha

contempt

magga

path

macchariya

avarice

mahhati

to conceive

mahhita

conceiving

*mahnussava

tide of conceiving (140.30)

*mattatthaka

lasting for a moment (28.7)

*mattha

churning-stick (126.17)

mada

vanity

manasikdra

attention

manussa

human

mano

mind, mental

mamankdra

mine-making

marana

death


1372 The Majjhima Nikaya


Pali

English

mahaggata

exalted

*mahacea

pomp (82.28)

mahapurisa

great man

mahabhuta

great element

*mahi

greatness (35.30)

mahesakkha

influential

matikft

codes (summaries of teachings)

mana

conceit

maya

deceit

miccha

wrong

micchacdra

misconduct

middha

torpor

muta

sensed

mudita

appreciative joy

muni

sage

musavada

false speech

mula

root

metta

loving-kindness

moha

delusion

yathabhuta

as it actually is

*ydvetadohi

as far as this (81.9)

yogakkhema

security from bondage

yoni

(mode of) generation

yoniso

wise, thorough

rana

conflict

rati

' delight

raga

lust

ruci

approval

rupa

(1) form (visible object); (2) material
form, materiality; (3) fine-mater
(being)

labha

gain

loka

world

lokuttara

supramundane

lobha

greed

vacl

speech, verbal

vatta

round (of existence)

vata

observance

vaya

vanishing

vaca

speech


Glossary 1373


Pali

English

vayama

effort

vayo

air

*vala

strainer (35.5; 56.7)

vicaya

investigation

iricara

sustained thought

vicikiccha

doubt

vijja

true knowledge

vinnana

consciousness

vinnanancayatana

base of infinite consciousness

vinflata

cognized

*vitnbhi

canopy (45.4)

vitakka

thought, applied thought

vinaya

(1) discipline; (2) removal

vinipata

perdition

vinibandha

shackle

*vipakkamati

to disperse (127.11)

viparinama

change

*vipariyasa

(mental) derangement (104.17)

vipassana

insight

vipaka

result

*vipekkhati

to look about (91.10)

vibhava

non-being, extermination

vimutta

liberated

vimutti

deliverance

vimokkha

liberation

viraga

(1) dispassion; (2) fading away (as
impermanence)

viriya

energy

vivatta

world-expansion

vivada

dispute

viveka

seclusion

visama

unrighteous

visuddhi

purification

vihimsa

cruelty

vimamsa

investigation

*vuddhasTla

mature virtue (95.9)

*vekuranja

not of either kind (?) (93.14)

veda

(1) untranslated: ancient Indian sa
ture; (2) inspiration

vedana

feeling

vedayita

what is felt, feeling

veramam

abstinence

vessa

merchant (caste)

vossagga

relinquishment


1374 The Majjhima Nikaya


Pali

vohara

*vyapajjitar

samyojana

s amuatta

samvara

sathvega

samsara

sakadagamin

sakkaya

sakkayaditthi

sakkara

sagga

sankappa

sankilesa

sankhata

sankhara

sanganika

sangha


sacca

*sanhulha

sati

satipatthana
satta
sattapada
s addhamma
saddha

saddhanusarin

santa

santi

santosa

sanditthika

sappurisa

s abba

sabbanhu

sama

samana

samatha

*samanvaneti

samacara

samadhi


English

expression

one who undertakes (work) (124.32)
fetter

world-contraction

restraint

sense of urgency

round of births

once-re turner

personality

personality view

honour

heaven

intention

defilement

conditioned

formation

society

untranslated: (1) the Buddhist monastic
order; (2) the community of noble
disciples
truth

concocted (56.30)
mindfulness

foundation of mindfulness
being

position of beings .

(1) true Dhamma; (2) good quality
faith

faith-follower

peaceful

peace

contentment
visible here and now
true man
all

omniscient

righteous

recluse

(1) serenity; (2) stilling (of formations);

(3) settlement (of litigation)
to find (131.4)
conduct, behaviour
concentration


Glossary 1375


Pali

English

samapatti

attainment (in meditation)

samudaya

origin, arising

sampajahna

full awareness

samphappalapa

gossip

samboijhanga

enlightenment factor

sambodhi

enlightenment

samma

(1) fully, completely; (2) right(ly)

sarana

refuge

sallekha

effacement

salayatana

sixfold base

sassata

eternal

satheyya

fraud

samaggl

concord

sarambha

presumption

sasana

Dispensation (of Buddha)

sikkhfi

training

sikkhSpada

training precept

siloka

praise

slla

(1) virtue; (2) habit; (3) rule

sllabbata

rules and observances

sukha

pleasure, pleasant, bliss

sugata

sublime, Sublime One

sugati

good destination

suiinata

voidness

suta

(1) heard; (2) learning

sudda

worker (caste)

suddhavasa

Pure Abodes

subha

beauty, beautiful

*suvaca

easy to admonish (15.4)

*suvihata

fully stretched out (121.5)

*susamannittha

well investigated (pp. su + samannesati)
(47.16)

sekha

disciple in higher training

senasana

resting place

s oka

sorrow

sotapanna

stream-enterer

somanassa

joy

*hassaka

ridiculous (80.15; 99.10)

hita

welfare

hiri

shame

hetu

cause



Index of Subjects


This index lists significant references only. Italicised numbers
refer to the page numbers of the Introduction; references to sutta
passages give sutta number followed by section number. The
abbreviation "ff." is here used to indicate that the term of entry
pertains to a continuing or repetitive sequence of sections and
does not necessarily mean that the term occurs in every section
of the sequence. References may be listed under an entry even
when the term itself does not appear in the text, as long as the
passage is pertinent to the term of entry.

When a stock formulation is applied to each term in a set of
categories, the reference is usually given only under the name of
the set, not under the individual items belonging to that set. For
example, the passage on the enlightenment factors at 2.21 is reg-
istered under Enlightenment factors, but not under the names of
the individual factors. Cross-references ensure that essential ref-
erences are not overlooked.

Pali equivalents are provided for all key doctrinal terms,
though not for terms of lesser importance or for entries without
an exact Pali counterpart. With few exceptions, the Pali term, is
given in the singular, even though the English entry may be
plural. When two Pali words with a different denotation are ren-
dered by a single English word, the two are listed as separate
entries - e.g.. Mind is listed twice, corresponding to citta and to
mano. When a single English word represents two Pali words
with overlapping meanings but different contextual usage, the
two sets of references are classified within the same entry sepa-
rated by a slash - e.g.. Compassion as a rendering for both
karuna and anukampa.


1377


1378 The Majjhima Nikaya


Abhidhamma, n.362, n.693, n.1047, n.1077, n.1222
Action ( kamma ), 45, 4.29, 86.17, n.824, 99.24ff., n.915, nn.926-28; and
feeling, 136.6; beings heirs of, 135.4ff., nn.1224-25; fourfold,
57.7ff.; great exposition of, 136.7ff.; Niganthas' theory of, 14.17ff.,
56.3, 101.2ff.; purification of, 61.8ff.; that ends action, 57.11; three-
fold, 56.4. See also Conduct; Divine Eye; Reappearance
Action ( kammanta ): right, 117.24ff., 141.27; wrong, 117.23. See also
Noble Eightfold Path

Ageing (jam), 9.22, 13.19, 26.7, 82.30, 130.5, 141.12; and death,
9.21ff., 38.17ff., 115.11, 138.3

Aggregates ( khandha ), 26, 10.38, 23.4, 28.4, 28.28, n.460, 109.4ff.,
n.1326, 149.3, 149.9, 149.11, 151.11; and clinging, 44.6, n.461,
75.24, 109.6, 143.11; and Tathagata, 72.20; as basis for agita-
tion, 138.20; as feeble, etc., 112.5f.; as impermanent, etc.,

22.26, 35.4, 35.20, 64.9ff., 109.15, 147.3ff.; as not self, 22.16,

22.27, 22.40, 35.24f., 62.3, 109.13, 109.16; as personality, 44.2;
as self, 22.15, n.257, 35.10ff„ 44.7, 109.10, 131.8, 138.20; as suf-
fering, 9.15, 141.20; delight in, 131.4ff.; gratification in, etc.,
109.12; rise and fall of, 10.38, 72.15, 122.16f.

Agitation ( paritassana ), 22.18f., 22.20f., n.260, 138.20ff.

Air element ( vayodhatu ), 1.6, 28.21ff., 49.14, 62.11, 140.17; medita-
tion like, 62.16. See also Elements
Ajlvakas, 50, n.73, 71.13f., 76.53
All (sahha), 1.2, 1.25, n.3, n.19, 37.3, 49.23ff.

Almsfood ( pindapata ), 5.29, 32.7, 77.9, 114.42, 151.3. See also
Ascetic practices; Eating
Anattalakkhana Sutta, n.314

Anger ( kodha , kopa), 3.9, 5.10ff., 7.3, 15.3, 16.7, 21.2, 23.4, 40.3, 40.7,
54.4, 54.12, 67.16, 104.6, 135.9, 140.28. See also Hate; 111 will
Animal realm ( tiracchanayoni ), 12.36, 12.38, 57.3, 97.30, 129.18ff.,
130.2

Annihilationism ( ucchedavada ), n.170, 22.20, 22.37, 60.7, n.734,
76.7ff., n.948, n.1017. See also Views: wrong
Applied thought ( vitakka ), 43.19f., 44.15. See also Jhana
Appreciative joy ( mudita ), 7.15, n.95, 40.11, 50.14, 55.9, 62.20,
118.14; as basis for insight, 52.10; as immeasurable deliver-
ance, 43.31, 127.7; as path to Brahma-world, 83.5, 97.34, 99.26
Approval (ruci), 95.14f., 101.11, 102.15f.

Arahant, 43/., n.88, n.266, 22.42, 23.4, 34.6, 35.25, 51.3, 70.12,
73.6ff„ 76.51f., 80.14, 107.11, 118.9, 142.5f„ n.1351, 152.11ff.,


Index of Subjects 1379


n.1360; achievement of, 7.22, 57.15, 73.26, 75.28, 82.14, 86.16,
92.27; as brahmin, 18.4, 27.7, 39.24, 89.17, 98.1 Iff.; epithets of,
22.30ff., 39.22ff.; foundations of, 140.25ff.; no conceiving,
1.51ff., nn.25-26, 140.30ff.; ten factors of, 65.34, 78.14, 117.34;
testing claims of, 112.2ff.; torments none, 51.28; typology of,
44, 64.16, n.659, 70.15f.

Arrogance ( atimana ), 3.14, 7.3ff., 15.3ff., 54.4, 54.13, 135.15
Ascetic practices, 5.29, 32.7, 40.5f., 77.9, 113.12f., 124.9ff.
Assemblies, 12.29f.

Attachment ( upadhi ), 66.14ff., 105.28ff., 140.27; objects of, 26.6ff.,
n.299, 64.9, 105.28ff

Attained-to-view (ditthippatta), 65.11, 70.18, n.705
Avarice ( macchariya ), 3.11, 7.3ff., 15.3ff., 40.3, 40.7, 104.8, 135.13
Aversion ( patigha ), 9.8, 44.25ff., n.475, 62.21, 148.28ff., 148.34ff.,
151. 3ff. See also Anger; Hate; 111 will

Bad character ( tassapapiyyasika ), 104.19
Bases ( ayatana ), 9.49ff., 10.40, 38.17ff„ 102.25, 115.10, n.1082,
121.10, 121.12, 140.9, 149.2ff.; as impermanent, etc., 146.6f.,
147.3ff.; as not self, 148.10ff.; desire for, 133.13f., 133.17f.,

149.3, 149.9; external, 137.5, 146.7, 148.5; internal, 105.27ff.,
137.4, 146.6, 148.4; not clinging to, 112.9f., 143.5f. See also
Faculties, sense

Beauty, 135.10; liberation of, 77.22, 137.26; sign of, 5.6f.

Being ( bhava ), 1.171, n.29, 9.29ff., 38.17ff., 43.15, 49.27f.; cessation
of, 60.32ff.; renewal of, 26.18, 43.16f., 123.20. See also Taints
Beings ( bhiita ), 1.7, 49.15

Bhikkhu: called a recluse, etc., 39.22ff.; crossed attachment, 25.20,
26.42; difficult to correct, 15.3, 21.10, 65.23, 65.25, 69.9,
103.11ff.; easy to correct, 15.5, 21.10, 65.24, 65.26, 69.9, 103.10;
evil wishes of, 5.10ff.; honoured, 108.13ff.; how he shines,
32.4ff., 122.3; (in)capable of growth, 16.13, 16.25, 33.3, 33.16;
liberated, 22.36, 37.3, 72.16f., 74.13; master of thoughts, 20.8;
restrained from taints, 2.22; reviewing self, 15.7f.; tamed
death, 125.32; worthy of gifts, 65.34, 125.30
Bhikkhunl(s), 21.2ff„ 56.19, 65.9, 68.14ff„ 73.8, 142.7, n.1291,
146.2ff„ n.1318, n.1322

Birth ( jati ), 9.25ff., 26.6, 38.17ff., 115.11, 130.4, 141.11
Blemish ( angana ), 5.2ff.

Bliss of renunciation, etc., 66.21, 122.3, 139.9


1380 The Majjhima Nikaya


Bodhisatta. See Buddha

Body {kayo), 23.4, 28.9, 74.9, 75.21, 77.29; as not self, 28.7ff.; contem-
plation of, 10.4ff., n.138, 74.9, 118.24; mindfulness of, 119.3ff.
Body-witness ( kayasakkhin ), 65.11, 70.17, n.704
Brahma (s), 47, 56, 1.10, n.ll, 22.36, 49.5, 49.18, 50.29, 55.7, 55.11,
84.4, 90.15, 93.5, 115.15, 120.12; assembly of, 12.29f.; B.-world,
6.14, 83.6, 83.21, 97.31ff., 99.22ff.; Wheel of, 12.9, n.181. See
also Index of Proper Names, Baka the B.; B. Sahampati; B.
Sanankumara

Brahmajala Sutta, n.20, n.263, n.510, n.744, n.935
Brahmin(s), 48ff„ 50.12ff„ 50.17ff., 84.4ff., 93.5ff., 95.12ff„ 96.3ff„
96.10ff., 98.3ff., 99.4ff., 100.7, 107.2; arahant as, 18.4, 27.7,
39.24, 89.17, 98.11ff. See also Castes; Recluses and brahmins
Buddha: and omniscience, 71.5, n.714, 90.5ff.; arouser of path,
108.5; as knowledge and vision, 18.12, n.231, 133.9; conception
and birth, 123.3ff.; conduct, 88.8ff., 91.10ff.; confidence in, 7.5,
11.15, 47.14f.; definition of, 91.31, 91.33, 92.19; early Ufe, 14.5,

26.13, 75.10; enlightenment, 4.28ff., 26.18, 36.38ff.; eye of,

26.21; footprints of, 27.3ff.; fully enlightened, 27.3ff., 27.26,

47.14, 89.10ff.; good report of, 41.2, 60.2, 75.4, 82.2, 91.3, 140.5;
honoured by disciples, 35.26, 77 Mi., 89.13; impossible for,
115.14ff.; leader of men, 137.25f.; lucidity of wisdom, 12.62,
27.2, 99.30; not subject to delusion, 4.21, 12.63, 36.47; quest for
enlightenment, 4.3ff., 12.44ff., 19.2ff., 26.13ff., 36.12ff.; past and
future, 51. 2f., 123.2; physical characteristics,.91.9; praise of,
27.2, 95.9, 99.30; supernormal powers, 12.6, 49.26, 86.5, 91.7,
92.14; teacher of group, 137.22ff. See also Tathagata

Castes, 48f, 40.13f„ 84.5ff., 90.10ff., 93.5ff., 96.3ff„ 96.10ff.
Celibacy ( brahmacariya ), 27.13, 51.14, 73.9, 73.11, 99.9, 99.21
Cessation ( nirodha ), 3.8ff., 26.15f., 26.19, 38.9ff., 62.29, 83.21,
118.21, 139.5, 144.10; of being, 60.32ff.; of formations, 102.4ff.;
of personality, 44.4, 64.8, 148.22ff.; of suffering, 9.17, 22.38,
28.28, 38.20, 38.40, 75.25, 115.11, 141.22, 145.4. See also Four
Noble Truths; Nibbana

Cessation of perception and feeling ( sahhavedayitanirodha ), 41,
30.21, 31.18, 43.23, n.446, 44.16ff., nn.467-72, 50.9, n.520, 59.15,
66.34, 113.29; and death, 43.25; as basis for insight, 111.19f.; as
blindfolding Mara, 25.20, 26.42; as liberation, 77.22, 137.29
Charnel ground contemplations, 10.14ff., 13.21ff., 119.9ff.


Index of Subjects 1381


Clinging ( upadana ), 9.33ff., n.125, 11.5, 11.9ff., nn.174-75, 24.13,
nn.289-90, 37.3, 38.17ff., 38.30, 102.15f., 102.24, 106.10ff.,
115.11, 138.20f., 140.22, 143.5ff.; and five aggregates, 44.6,
n.461, 75.24, 109.6; best object of, 106.11; to doctrine of self,
11.14, n.173, 22.23

Cognized ( vinnata ), 1.22, 22.15f., 112.3f.

Compassion ( karuna ), 7.14, 26.21, 40.10, 50.14, 55.8, 62.19, 118.4;
as basis for insight, 52.9; as immeasurable deliverance, 43.31,
127.7; as path to Brahma-world, 83.5, 97.33, 99.25 /
(anukampd), 4.21, 4.34, 12.63, 31.22, 99.19; for disciples, 3.2,
8.18, 19.27, 103.2, 106.15, 122.25, 137.22ff., 152.18

Conceit ( mana ), n.6, 2.22, n.50, 3.14, 7.3ff., 9.8, 20.8, 22.20, 22.35,
62.23, 109.13, 112.11, 112.20, 122.17

Conceiving ( mannita ), 1.3ff., n.6, 72.15, 113.21f., 113.29, 140.30ff.

Concentration ( samadhi ), 38f, 4.18, 7.8, 16.26, 19.8, 20.3ff., 24.2,
32.7, 36.45, 40.8, 44.11, 44.12, n.464, 69.15, 77.17, 122.7ff„
12B.31, nn.1195-96; complacency over, 29.4, 30.10; enlight-
enment factor, 118.35; obstacles to, 128.16ff.; right, 117.3,
141.31, 149.10. See also Enlightenment factors; Faculties,
Spiritual; Jhanas; Noble Eightfold Path; Spiritual power,
bases for

Conception (of embryo), 38.26, 93.18

Concord (s amaggi), 27.13, 31.6f., 48.6, 51.14, 59.5, 89.11, 103.3ff„
104.21, 128.11f.

Conduct ( carana ), 53.23, n.565 / (s amacara), 4.4ff., 4.29, 39.4ff.,
41.8ff., 41.12ff., 60.7ff., 78.10, 88.10ff., 88.14ff., 114.5ff.,
115.16ff. See also Action

Confession of wrong, 48.11, 61.11, 65.7, 65.13, 104.18, 140.33

Confidence (pasada), 6.6, 11.3f., 31.22, 106.3ff., n.1010, 108.13ff.;
perfect, 7.5, n.89, 9.2ff., 81.18, 142.4. See also Faith

Conflict ( rana ), 139.13f.

Confrontation ( sammukha ), 104.14

Consciousness ( vinnana ), 9.57ff., 18.16, 38.2, 38.17ff., 43.4ff., 43.9,
nn.431-33, 49.25, 77.29, 102.7, 137.6, 140.19, 143.5ff., 143.7,
148.6; aggregate of, 28.28, 109.8f., n.1040; bound by desire,
133.13ff.; dependently arisen, 38.3, 38.8, n.404; distracted
externally, 138.10f.; impermanent, 146.8; leading to rebirth,
106.3ff.; manifestation of, 28.27; mind-c., n.130, 43.10, n.437;
not self, 35.19, 146.8, 147.3ff., 148.10ff.; stuck internally,
138.12ff. See also Aggregates


1382 The Majjhima Nikaya


Contact {phassa), 9.45ff., 18.16, 28.8, 38.17ff., 44.20, 57.8ff.,
62.13ff„ 109.9, n.1040, 137.7, 140.19, 143.9, 147.3ff., 148.7; not
self, 148.1 Off.

Contempt ( makkha ), 3.10, 7.3ff., 15.3ff., 40.3, 40.7, 104.7
Contentment ( santosa ), 24.2, 27.14, 32.7, 51.15, 77.8f., 108.16
Converting magic, 56.8, 56.25f.

Counsellor-treasure, 129.41
Covering with grass, 104.20

Covetousness ( abhijjha ), 7.3ff., 10.2ff., 40.3, 41.10, 114.7, 114.8,
114.9, 140.28; abandoning of, 27.18, 39.13, 40.7, 41.14, 51.19,
114.7ff., 140.28. See also Greed; Lust; Sensual desire
Craving (tanha), 29, n.6, 9.11, 9.37ff„ n.126, 11.5, 16.8ff„ 38.17ff.,
82.41, 148.9, 149.3f.; abandoned, 1.171, 2.22, 20.8, 22.33, 73.6,
149. 9f.; as arrow, 105.18, 105.23; deliverance from, 37.3, 38.41;
not self, 148.10ff.; origin of personality, 44.3; origin of suffer-
ing, 9.16, 141.21. See also Four Noble Truths; Taints
Cruelty ( vihimsa ), 2.20, 19.5, 33.6, 33.19, 51.9f„ 62.19, 114.8f.,
135.7. See also Killing

Death ( marana ), 9.22, 26.9, 130.8, 141.13; in Noble One's
Discipline, 105.22; realm of, 33.3, 33.5
Deathless ( amata ), 26.12, 26.18, 26.20f., 52.15, 64.9ff., 106.13,
n.1023. See also Nibbana

Deceit ( maya ), 3.12, 7.3ff„ 15.3ff„ 40.3, 40.7, 104.9
Defiled Radiance, gods of (sankilitthabha devata), 127.9ff.
Defilement ( sankilesa ), 26.11

Delight () nandi ), 1.3ff., 1.171, n.29, 18.8, 38.30, 43.15, 49.5, 49.27f.,
131. 4ff., 133.13ff., 145.3f., n.1316, 148.28ff.; and lust, 19.26, 23.4,
146.12; in Dhamma, 52.4ff., 64.9ff. / {rati), 6.7, 75.10, 119.33
Delight in creating, gods who ( nimmanarati deva), 31.21, 41.22,
97.30 120.10

Deliverance {vimutti), 22.29, 24.2, 32.7, 37.8, 38.41, 44.29, 74.12,
90.12, 109.18, 118.41ff., 147.10, 148.41, 149.11, 151.20; by wis-
dom ( panhavimutti ), 6.19, n.83, 12.36, 12.42, 38.40, 40.14, 41.43,
43.14, 53.22, 54.24, 71.9, 73.24, 77.36, 78.11, 108.23, 119.42,
120.37, 146.13; of mind ( cetovimutti ), 6.19, n.83, 12.36, 12.42,
25.9, n.293, 38.40, 40.14, 41.43, 43.14, 43.26ff„ n.451, n.458,
52.3ff., 53.22, 54.24, 64.16, n.659, 71.9, 73.24, 77.36, 78.11,
108.23, 119.42, 120.37, 122.4, n.1150, 127.4ff„ 146.13; perpetual
(asamaya), 29.6, n.348, 122.4; unshakeable {akuppa), 26.18,



Index of Subjects 1383


26.30, 29.7, n.349, 30.23, 43.35ff.; with simile, 39.21, 77.36. See
also Knowledge of destruction of taints; Liberation
Delusion ( moha ), 1.123ff., 9.5, 11.5, 14.2, 36.46f., 43.35ff., 45.6,
73.4, 95.19, 140.28, 150.4ff., 151. 3ff. See also Ignorance
Dependent origination ( paticca samuppada), 30f, 1.171, n.29,

11.16, 38.9ff., 38.16ff., n.410, n.414, 75.24f., 98.13, 115.11,
n.1329; as the Dhamma, 28.28, 79.7; hard to see, 26.19
Desire (chanda). See Craving; Lust; Sensual desire
Desireless ( appanihita ), 49.20
Despair ( upayasa ), 141.18

Destination (gati ), 12.35ff., 57.3, 57.5, 130.2. See also Divine eye;
Reappearance

Dhamma: as refuge, 108.9; badly proclaimed, 11.13, 104.2; con-
fidence in, 7.6, 9.2ff., 11.15, 47.14L; desire for, 52.4ff., n.553,
64.9ff.; doubt about, 16.4; good in the beginning, etc., 27.11,
41.2, 51.12, 60.2, 82.2, 91.3, 148.2; growth in, 16.14, 21.8,
33.16; hearing, 48.13, 65.32, 70.23, 75.25, 95.29L, 137.22ff.;
heirs in, 3.2f.; higher ( abhidhamma ), 32.8, 69.17, 103.4; inspi-
ration in, 7.8, 33.23, 48.14, 99.21; man's own wealth, 96.12;
monuments to, 89.10ff.; profound, 26.19, 72.18, 95.17ff.; pur-
pose of, 22.20, 35.26; reflective acceptance of, 22.10L, 70.23,
95.26; similar to raft, 22.20, 35.26; summaries of, 82.35ff.;
teaching of, 32.4, 33.21, 139.8; visible here and now, 38.25;
vision of, 56.18, n.588, 74.15, 75.24, n.746, 91.36, 147.10; well
proclaimed, 11.15, 22.42ff., 27.3ff., 27.26, 47.14L, 85.60,
89.10ff.; Wheel of, 26.25, 92.17ff., 111.23, 141.2. See also
Dispensation; Holy life
Dhammacakkappavattana Sutta, n.314

Dhamma-follower ( dhammanusarin ), 22.46, n.273, 34.10, 65.11,
70.20, n.707

Diligence ( appamada ), 31. 8f., 70.11ff., 128.13
Direct knowledge ( abhinna ), 1.27ff., n.22, 3.8ff., 26.15L, 30.2, 37.3,
43.12, 47.14f., 49.10ff., 74.14, 77.12, 83.21, 119.29ff„ 139.5,
149.10; consummation of, 77.15ff., 100.7f.

Disciple in higher training ( sekha ), 1.27ff., n.21, n.23, n.114, 23.4,
35.24, 51.3, 53.5ff„ 70.13, 73.17, 107.11, 117.34, 152.10, n.1357.
See also Noble disciple
Discontent ( arati ), 6.7, 62.20, 119.33

Disenchantment ( nibbida ), 22.28, n.265, 26.15f., 28.6ff., 62.8ff.,
74.12, 83.21, 109.17, 140.14ff., 147.9, 148.40 / ( anabhirati ), 50.18f.


1384 The Majjhima Nikaya


Dispassiori ( viraga ), n.48, 22.29, n.265, 26.15f., 26.19, 28.6ff., 62.8,
74.12, 83.21, 109.18, n.1121, 140.14ff., 147.10, 148.40. See also
Fading away

Dispensation ( sasana ), 56.18, 65.4, 65.14ff., 70.27, 73.13f., 74.15,
89.12, 89.18, 91.36, 122.25f„ 137.22ff. See also Dhamma; Holy life
Dispute ( vivada ), 13.11ff., 18.8, 48.2ff., 59.5, 74.6ff., 89.11, 103.15f.,
104.2, 104.5f., 128.3ff.; six roots of, 104.6ff.

Diversity ( nanatta ), 1.24, n.18, 54.21, 102.14f., 128.25,137.19f.
Divine abodes ( brahmavihara ), 39/., n.95, n.526, 83.6ff. See also
Appreciative joy; Compassion; Equanimity; Loving-kindness
Divine ear ( dibbasota ), 6.15, 12.7, 73.20, 75.6, 77.32, 108.19, 119.38
Divine eye ( dibbacakkhu ), 4.29, 6.18, 27.24, 32.6, 36.40, 51.25, 71.8,
73.23, 76.48, 79.7f„ 79.42, 108.22, 119.41; and Buddha's knowl-
edge of kammic retribution, 12.37ff., 130.2; and theories of
rebirth, 136.9ff.; with simile, 39.20, 77.35, 130.2
Divine messengers ( devaduta ), 83.4, 130.4ff.

Domineering ( palasa ), 3.10, 7.3ff., 15.3ff., 40.3, 40.7, 104.7
Doubt ( vidkiccha ), 2.11, n.38, n.157, 16.3ff., 23.4, 38.10, 48.8,
64.2ff„ 108.26, 128.16; abandoning of, 27.18, 38.11, 39.13,

51.19, 81.18, 142.3f.; purification by overcoming, 24.9. See also
Fetters; Hindrances

Earth element ( pathavldhatu ), 1.3, n.5, 28.6ff., 49.11, 62.8, 121.5,
140.14; meditation like, 62.13. See also Elements
Eating: at right time, 27.13, n.321, 51.14, 66.6, n.671, 67.17, 70.2ff.,
n.696; at single session, 21.7, 65.2ff., 113.20; little, 12.52ff.,
36.28, 77. 8f.; meat, 55.5ff., n.574; moderation in, 39.9, 53.9,
69.11, 107.5, 125.17; to excess, 16.11
Eel-wriggling ( amaravikkhepa ), 76.30ff.

Effacement ( sallekha ), 3.3, 8.4, 8.12, n.106
Effort, right ( samma vayamd), 117.9ff., 141.29, 149.10. See also
Energy; Noble Eightfold Path; Striving: right
Elation ( ubbilla ), 128.20

Elements ( dhatu ), 10.12, n.149, 62.8ff., 115.4ff., 119.8; eighteen,

115.4, n.1077; great elements ( mahabhuta ), 9.54, 28.5ff., n.328,

33.4, 76.7, 106.4, 109.9; six, 112.7f., 115.5, 140.8, 143.10
Elephant-treasure, 88.18; 129.36

Endurance ( adhivasana ), 2.18, 119.35, 125.30
Energy ( viriya ), 3.3, 4.16, 24.2, 32.7, 53.14, 69.13, 70.27, 85.58,
90.10, 128.22L; enlightenment factor of, 118.32. See also
Enlightenment factors; Faculties, spiritual; Striving: right


Index of Subjects 1385


Enlightenment ( sambodhi ), 1.171ff., 3.8, 12.23, 16.26, 26.15f., 36.31,
53.19, 83.21, 139.5; bliss of, 66.21, 122.3, 139.9
Enlightenment factors ( bojjhanga ), 2.21, n.48, 10.42, 77.20, 103.3,
104.5, 118.13, 118.29ff., 118.41ff„ 146.13, n.1321, 149.10, 151.18
Enthusiasm ( ussolhi ), 16.26

Envy (; issa ), 3.11, 7.3ff., 15.3ff„ 40.3, 40.7, 104.8, 135.11
Equanimity ( upekkha ), 12.51, 22.39, 28.11, n.337, 62.13ff., 101.23,
103.14, 106.10, 106.12, 137.8, 140.10, 140.20ff., n.1275, 152.4ff„
n.1354, 152.11ff.; as divine abode, 7.16, 40.12, 50.14, 55.10f.,
62.21, 118.4; as immeasurable deliverance, 43.31, 127.7; as
path to Brahma-world, 83.5, 97.35, 99.27; based on diversity,
54.15, 54.21, 137.18f.; based on unity, 54.15, 54.21, n.571,
137.19f., nn. 1243-44; enlightenment factor of, 118.36; insight
based on, 52.11; of household life, 137.14; of renunciation,
137.15. See also Enlightenment factors; Jhanas
Eternalism (sassatavdda), 2.8, n.170, 22.15f., 22.20, 22.25, 38.2ff.,
49.3ff., n.719, n.734, 102.14ff. See also Views: speculative
Evil One. See Index of Proper Names, Mara
Evil wishes ( pdpiccha ), 5.10ff., 15.3ff., 40.3, 40.7, 104.10
Exalted deliverance of mind ( mahaggatacetovimutti ), 127.8ff.
Expressions ( vohdra ), 112.3f.

Extinguishing ( parinibbana ), 8.16, n.lll

Extolling and disparaging, 29.2ff., 30.8ff., 60.8ff., 113.3ff., 139.6ff.

Faculties, sense ( indriya ), 43.21f., 75.8, 152.2ff. See also Bases;
Restraint of faculties

Faculties, spiritual (indriya), 70.20f., 77.18, 103.3, 104.5, 118.13,
149.10, 151.15

Fading away ( viraga ), 62.29, 118.21. See also Dispassion
Faith ( saddha ), 22.47, 53.11, 65.27, 70.19, 70.23, 85.58, 90.10,

95.14f., 95.33, 102. 15f.; supported by reasons, 47.16, 60.4. See '
also Confidence; Faculties, spiritual
Faith-follower ( saddhanusarin ), 22.46, n.273, 34.10, 65.11, 70.21,
n.707

False speech ( musavdda ), 41.9, 54.4, 54.8, 61.3ff., 114.6; abstention
from, 27.13, 41.13, 47.14, 114.6
Fear ( bhaya ), 4.4ff., 4.20, 6.8, 67.14ff., 115.2, 119.34, 128.19
Fear of wrongdoing ( ottappa ), 39.3, n.416, 53.13
Feeling ( vedana ), 9.41ff., 18.16, 43.7, 43.9, n.434, 44.22ff., 59.3ff.,
n.616, 74.10, 143.9, 148.8; aggregate of, 28.28, 109.8f.; and
growth towards wholesome, 70.7ff.; and underlying


1386 The Majjhima Nikaya


tendencies, 44.25ff., 148.28ff.; contemplation of, 10.32f., n.152,
37.3, 51.3f., 74.11, 118.25, 125.22ft, 140.19; dependent on con-
tact, 18.16, 28.8, 38.17ff., 109.9, 140.19, n.1320, 148.28ff.; full
understanding of, 13.32ff.; impermanent, 146.9f.; in arahant,
140.23f.; in noble disciple, 36.9, 38.40; in ordinary person,

36.8, 38.30; in realms of rebirth, 12.37ff., 57.8ff.; in Tathagata,
123.22; Niganthas' theory, 101 .12ff.; not self, 35.16, 148.10ff.
See also Aggregates

Fetters ( samyojana ), 42/., 2.11, 10.40, 22.34, 54.6, 64.2ff., n.651,
66.14ff„ 66.34, 138.10ff„ 139.7f.

Final knowledge (anna), 10.46, n.165, 65.29f„ 68.10, 68.14, 70.22,
70.27, 105.2ff., 112.2ff. See also Arahant; Knowledge of
destruction of taints

Fire element ( tejodhatu ), 1.5, 28.16ff., 49.13, 62.10, 140.16; medita-
tion like, 62.15. See also Elements
Fool (bala), 33.5, 115.2, 129.2ff.

Forest dwelling, 4.2ff„ 5.29, 17.2ff„ 32.7, 69.3ff., 77.9, 150.6
Formations ( sankhara ), 55/., 26.19, 35.4, 102.4ff., 102.10, 115.12; as
aggregate, 28.28, 109.8f.; as volitional actions, 9.61ff., n.131,
38.17ff., 57.8ff., n.602, 115.11; bodily, verbal, mental, 10.4,
43.25, 44.13ff., nn.465-70, 62.26f., 117.14, 118.18f.; not self,
35.18; vital, 43.23. See also Aggregates
Foulness (asubha), 10.10, 50.18, 62.22, 118.14, 119.7
Foundations ( adhitthana ), 140.11ff., nn.1270-71
Foundations of mindfulness. See Mindfulness, foundations of
Four Great Kings, gods of ( catummaharajika deva), 12.29f., 31.21,
41.18, 97.30, 120.6

Four Noble Truths (ariyasacca), 24ff., 2.11, 9.14ff., n.118, 10.44,
28.2ff., n.328, 43.2f., 63.9, 77.14, 81.18, 141.2f., 141.8ff., 142.3f.,
n.1316, nn.1333-34; as Buddhas' special teaching, 56.18, 74.15,
91.36; as Wheel of Dhamma, 141.2. See also Knowledge of
destruction of taints

Fraud ( satheyya ), 3.12, 7.3ff., 15.3ff., 40.3, 40.7, 104.9
Fruition attainment ( phalasamapatti ), 45, n.83, n.21 1, n.349, n.449,
n.458, n.471, n.670, n.742, n.967, n.1027, n.1137, n.1283
Full admission ( upasampada ), 7.22, n.100, 57.14ff., 73.16f., 75.26ff.
See also Going forth

Full awareness ( sampajanha ), 10.8, 27.16, 39.11, 51.17, 107.7,

119.6, 122.9ft, 125.19. See also Mindfulness: foundations of


Index of Subjects 1387


Full understanding ( parinna ), 1.3ff., n.7, n.23, n.28, n. 172, n.200;
of aggregates, 149.11, 151.11; of clinging, ll.lOff.; of every-
thing, 37.3; of feeling, 13.38; of material form, 13.31; of sensu-
al pleasures, 13.17

Gain and honour, 29.2, 30.8, 47.8, 50.17ff„ 65.31, 68.9. 113.7f.
Generation ( yoni ), 12.321.

Generosity ( caga ), 68.10ff., 99.9, 99.18f., 99.21, 120.3. See also Giving
Ghosts (petal 12-36, 12.39, 97.30, 130.2

Giving ( dana ), 35.30, 56.17, 110.12, 110.23, 135.14, 142.5ff„ n.1292
Gladness ( pamojja ), 7.8, 33.23, 40.9, 48.14, 99.21
Goal ( nittha ), 11.5

Gods (deva), 1.8, 12.36, 22.36, 31.21, 41.18ff., 49.16, 56.11, 90.13f„
100.42, 120. 6ff., 120.19ff„ 127.9ff.

Going forth ( pabbajja ), 7.22, n.100, 27.7, 27.12, 39.2, 40.2, 40.13f.,
51.13, 57.14ff„ n.609, 73.15f., 75.26ff„ 82.6ff„ 83.4f., 112.12,
n.1158; out of faith, 5.32, 29.2, 30.8, 67.16ff„ 68.5, 107.15; with-
out faith, 5.32, 107.15; why go forth?, 82.29ff.

Good qualities ( saddhamtna ), 53.11ff., 110.16
Gossip ( samphappalapa ), 41.9, 114.6; abstention from, 27.13, 41.13,
51.14, 114.6. See also Talk: pointless
Gotamaka Sutta, n.31

Gradual training ( anupubbasikkha ), 34ff., 27.7ff., 39.3ff., 51.13ff.,
53.5ff., 70.22f., 107.2ff., 112.12ff., 125.13ff.

Great Fruit, gods of ( vehapphald deva), 1.13, n.14, 49.10, 49.21
Great Man (mahdpurisa) , 91.5, 91.6ff., 91.9, 91.28ff., n.850, 92.10,
92.13ff., 151.2

Greed ( lobha ), 3.8, 7.3ff ., 9.5, 14.2, 54.4, 54.10, 73.4, 95.17. See also
Covetousness; Craving; Lust

Grief (domanassa), 13.9f., 22.18, 22.20, 36.8, 38.30, 44.28, 87.3,
129.3ff., 137.8, 137.12L, 140.10, 141.17. See also Suffering

Habits (sila), 78.9ff.

Harsh speech ( pharusa vdca), 41.9, 114.6; abstention from, 27.13,
41.13, 51.14,114.6

Hate (t iosa ), 1.99ff., 3.8, 9.5, 11.5, 14.2, 43.35ff., 45.6, 73.4, 95.18,
140.28, 150.4f£, 151. 3ff. See also Anger; Avarice; 111 will
Health, 65.2, 70.4, 75.19ff., 85.58, 90.10, 135.8
Heard (suta), 1.20, 22.15f., 112.3f.


1388 The Majjhima Nikaya


Heat (usnia), 43.22

Heaven (; sagga ), 12.36, 12.41, 22.47, 71.12, 71.14, 75.11, 129.32,
130.2. See also Divine eye; Reappearance: in happy destination
Hell (niraya), 12.21, 12.36f„ 13.15, 50.22ff., 57.3, 57.5, 57.8, 86.17,
97.6ff., 97.30, 129.7ff„ 130.2, 130.10ff. See also Divine eye;
Reappearance: in bad destination
High birth, 129.48, 135.16

Hindrances (nivarana), 36, 10.36, n.158, 23.4, 27.18, 43.20, 51.19,
54.6, 99.15, 107.9, 125.21, 151.10; with similes, 39.13
Holy life ( bmhmacariya ), 27.11f., 37.2f., 45.6, 51.12f., 63.4ff., 68.5,

73.13, 82.4, 89.10, 100.7, 112.12, 148.2; fruitful, 76.34ff„ 126.4,
126.14; goal of, 24.10, 29.7, 30.23, 44.29, 79.37ff.; misdirected,
12.44ff., 16.12; negations of, 76.6ff.; undoing of, 122.24; with-
out consolation, 76.20ff. See also Dhamma; Dispensation

Honesty, 85.58, 90.10
Horse-treasure, 88.18, 129.37

Household life, 21.6, 27.12, 51.13, 82.4, 112.12, 119.4ff., 125.23,
137.10ff.; householder, 54.3, 66.12, 67.18, 71.11f., n.715, 75.11,
99.4ff„ 99.20, 143.15

Ignorance ( avijja ), 2.6, 4.28ff., 9.65ff., 9.70, n.132, 19.26, 23.4,
38.18, 38.21, 44.29, 80.16, 105.18, 115.11, 125.10, 149.11; aban-
doned, 9.8, 22.31, 140.28; underlying tendency of, 18.8,
44.25ff., n.476, 148.28ff., 148.34ff. See also Delusion; Taints
111 will ( byapada ), 2.20, 7.3, n.158, 19.4, 33.6, 33.19, 40.3, 41.10,
48.8, 55.7, 64.2ff., 108,26, 114.7f., 140.28; abandoning of, 27.18,

39.13, 40.7, 41.14, 51.19, 62.18, 114.7f., 140.28. See also Anger;
Aversion; Hate; Hindrances

I-making ( ahankara ), 72.15, 109.13, 112.11, n.1061
Immaterial realms ( aruppa ), n.16, 60.29ff., nn.632-634
Immeasurable deliverance of mind ( appamdnacetovimutti ),
43.30f., 43.35, n.453, 127.4ff.

Immeasurable Radiance, gods of ( appamanabha deva), 127.9
Imperfections ( upakkilesa ), 7.3, 14.2, 128.27
Impermanence ( aniccata ), 26, 22.22, 28.8, 35.4, 50.18; contempla-
tion of, 52.4ff„ 62.23, 62.29, 64.9ff., n.655, 106.5, 118.21,
121.11; in body, 23.4, 28.7ff„ 74.9, 77.29; in feeling, 13.36,

37.3, 74.11, 140.19, 146.9ff.; in sense experience, 137.11ff.,
144.6f.; suffering, not self, 28f, 40, 22.26, 35.20, n.396, 109.15,
146.6ff„ 147.3ff.


Index of Subjects 1389


Imperturbable (anenja), 66.25ff., 105.10, n.1000, 106.3ff., 122.9f.,
n.1153

Impossibilities ( atthana ), 115.12ff.

Inattention ( amanasikara ), 128.17

Inclination of mind ( cittuppada ), 8.13ff., n.110, 114.8

Individuality ( attabhava ), 114.11

Inertia ( dutthulla ), 128.21

Infinite consciousness, base of ( vinnanancayatana ), 1.16, 8.9,
30.18, 31.15, 43.10, 59.12, 66.31, 77.22, n.1013, 137.26, 140.21f.,
143.12; and voidness, 121.7; as basis for insight, 52.13, 64.14,
111.13f.; as blindfolding Mara, 25.17, 26.39
Infinite space, base of ( akasanancdyatana ), 1.15, 8.8, 30.17, 31.14,
43.10, 59.11, 66.30, 77.22, n.1012, 137.26, 140.21f., 143.11; and
voidness, 121.6, n.1141; as basis for insight, 52.12, 64.13,

111. Ilf.; as blindfolding Mara, 25.16, 26.38
Influence ( mahesakkhatta ), 135.12
Insanity ( amulha ), 104.17

Insight ( vipassana ), 38f., 6.3, 32.5, 43.14, n.552, n.655, 73.18, 77.29,
111.2ff., 149.10f., 151.19. See also Mindfulness: foundations of;
Wisdom

Inspiration ( veda ), 7.8, n.91, 33.23, 48.14, 99.21
Intention (s ankappa): right, 60.11ff., 78.9, 78.13, 117.12ff.,
nn.1107-8, 141.25, 149.10; wrong, 60.8ff., 78.9, 78.12, 117.11.
See also Thought

Investigation-of-states ( dhammavicaya ), 117.8, 118.31. See also
Enlightenment factors

Jains. See Niganthas
Jewel-treasure, 129.38

Jhanas, 36/., 39/., 6.9, 8.4ff., 13.32ff„ 30.13ff„ 45.7, 51.20ff., 53.18,
59.7, 107.10, 113.21ff.; and Buddha's enlightenment, 4.22ff., ■
36.31, 36.34ff.; as basis for insight, 52.4ff., n.552, 64.9ff., n.655,
111.3ff.; as blindfolding Mara, 25.12ff., 26.34ff.; as bliss of
renunciation, etc., 66.21, n.678, 139.9; as fruits of holy life,
76.43ff., 79.37ff., 101.38ff.; as meditation praised by Buddha,
108.27; as objects of attachment, 66.26ff.; as right concentra-
tion, 141.31; as superhuman states, 31.10ff., 65.16ff.; as
Tathagata's footprints, 27.19ff.; first, 36.31, 43.18ff., 44.28,
78.12, 111.3f.; fourth, 43.26, 44.28, 66.25, 111.9f.; second, 78.13,
111.5f.; third, 111.7f.; with similes, 39.15ff., 77.25ff., 119.18ff.


1390 The Majjhima Nikaya


Joy ( somanassa ), 129.28ff., 137.8, 137.10f., n.1239, 140.10. See also
Pleasure

Kasinas, 77.24, n.768, 102.3, n.1140, n.1181
Killing (pdnatipdta), 41.8, 51. 9f., 54.4, 54.6, 55.12, 114.5, 135.5;
abstention from, 27.13, 41.12, 51.14, 114.5, 135.6; kammic
result of, 135.5f.

Knowledge and vision ( hanadassana ), 2.3, 38.23f., 77.12, 128.32,
149.9; complacency over, 29.5, n.347, 30.11; of deliverance,
24.2, 26.18, 32.7; purification by, 24.9ff., n.288; worthy of
noble ones, 12.2, n.178, 26.27, 31.10ff., 65.14f„ 99.10ff., 128.15.
See also Direct knowledge; Insight
Knowledge of destruction of taints ( asavakkhayandna ), 4.31f.,
27.25f., 36.42f„ 39.21, 51.26f., 65.20f„ 76.49f„ 76.52, 79.43f„
101.441, 112.191 See also Taints: liberation from

Lamentation ( parideva ), 141.15. See also Suffering

Lay followers ( upasaka , -ika), 51.4, 68.18ff., 73.9ff., 77.6, 143.15.

See also Refuge, going for
Learning ( suta ), 32.4, 33.22, 43.14, 53.14, 108.15
Liberated-by-faith (saddhavimutta), 65.11, 70.19, n.706
Liberated-by-wisdom {pahhavimutta), 65.11, 70.16, n.703
Liberated-in-both ways ( ubhatobhagavimutta ), 65.11, 70.15, n.702
Liberation ( vimokkha ): eight, 77.22, n.764, 137.26; immaterial, 6.10,
69.18, 70.15ff.; noble, 106.13; perpetual, 29.6, n.348; supreme,
44.28, 137.13; through not clinging, 102.25. See also Deliverance
Limited Radiance, gods-of ( parittabhd deva), 127.9
Lion's roar ( sihanada ), 11.2, n.166, 12.9
Litigation ( adhikarana ), 65.22ff., 104.12ff., n.982
Livelihood ( ajwa ), 4.7, 39.7, 104.5; right, 117.30ff., 141.28; wrong,
117.29. See also Noble Eightfold Path
Long life, 135.6

Loving-kindness ( metta ), 7.13, 40.9, 55.6f., 62.18, 93.9, 96.14,
118.14; as basis for insight, 52.8; as immeasurable deliver-
ance, 43.31, 127.7; as path to Brahma-world, 83.5, 97.32, 99.24;
in action, 31.7, 33.27, 48.5, 104.21, 128.12; under abuse, 21.6,
21.11, 21.20, 50.14f.

Low birth, 129.25, 135.15

Lust ( raga ), 1.75ff., 5.6f., 11.5, 16.8ff„ 43.35ff., 45.6, 48.8, 62.22,
67.19, 140.28, 148.34ff., 149.3, 150.4ff., 151.3ff.; underlying



Index of Subjects 1391


tendency of, 44.25ff., n.474, 148.28ff. See also Craving; Greed;
Sensual desire

Majority opinion ( yebhuyyasika ), 104.15

Malicious speech (pisund vacd), 4.9, 54.4, 54.9, 114.6; abstention
from, 27.13, 41.13, 51.14, 114.6

Material form, materiality ( rupa ), 9.54, 16.10, 28.26, 33.4, 33.17,
60.31, 106.4ff., n.1040; aggregate of, 28.5, 28.28, 109.8f.; full
understanding of, 13.18ff.; not self, 35.15, 62.3. See also
Aggregates; Body; Elements

Meditation, 38ff., 6.2, 32.12, 36.21ff., 50.13, 62.8ff., 108.27. See also
Concentration; Insight; Jhanas; Mindfulness; Serenity

Memorable qualities ( saramya dhamma), 48.6, 104.21f.

Memory (sati), 104.16

Mental exploration ( upavicara ), 137.8, 140.10

Mentality ( nama ), 9.54

Mentality-materiality ( namarupa ), 56, 9.53ff., n.129, 38.17ff.,
109.9, n.1040, 115.11

Middle Way ( majjhima patipada), 3.8ff., 139.5. See also Noble
Eightfold Path

Mind (citta): contemplation of, 10.32f., nn.154-55, 62.28, 118.20,
118.26; development of, 36.4, 36.9; diversity of, 78.10ff.;
equipment of, 99.21; higher mind, 20.2ff.; mastery over, 32.9;
purification of, 24.9ff. See also Deliverance: of mind;
Imperfections; Inclination of mind; Understanding: others'
minds

Mind ( mano ): and consciousness, 28.37; and sense faculties,
43.10, 43.21, n.443. See also Bases; Conduct; Faculties, sense;
Restraint: of faculties

Mindfulness (sati), 4.17, 53.16, n.560, 66.16, 69.14; enlightenment
factor of, 118.30; four foundations of (satipatthdna) , 40, 10.2ff v
10.46, n.136, 12.62, 33.25, 44.12, 51.3f„ 77.15, 103.3, 104.5,
118.13, 118.23ff., 125.22ff., 149.10, 151.12; of body
(kayagatasati), 119.2ff.; of breathing (anapanasati), 10.4. n.140,
62.5, 62.24ff., U8.15ff., 119.4; right, n.147, U7.9ff., 141.30,
149.10; three foundations of, 137.22ff. See also Enlightenment
factors; Faculties, spiritual; Full awareness; Noble Eightfold
Path

Mind-made body ( manomayakaya ), 77.30

Mind-objects (dhamma), 10.36ff., 118.27. See also Bases


1392 The Majjhima Nikaya


Naga serpent, 23.4 - -

Negligence ( pamada ), 3.15, 7.3ff., 25.8ff., 29.2ff., 37.11, 130.4ff.

Neither-perception-nor-non-perception

(nevasanMnasahnayatana), 1.18, 8.11, 26.16, 30.20, 31.17, 59.14,
66.33, 105.14, 140.21f., 143.12; and voidness, 121.9; as a basis
for insight, 111.17; as blindfolding Mara, 25.19, 26.41; best
object of clinging, 106.11; way to, 106.9

Nibbana, 32/., 1.26, 12.36, 26.12, 26.19, n.458, n.479, 75.19ff„

83.21, 102.23f„ 140.26, n.1280, n.1282; as Deathless, 26.12,
26.18, 64.9ff., n.1023; as goal, 22.20, 24.10, 35.26, 44.29; attain-
ment of, 11.17, 26.18, 26.30, 37.3, n.636, n.656, 106.10ff„
107.12ff„ 113.40f„ 140.22; here and now, n.20, 102.2, n.949;
person intent on, 105.16ff., 105.23

Niganthas, 52, 14.15ff., 56.11f., 101.2ff., 101.22. See also Index of
Proper Names, Nigantha Nataputta

Nihilism ( natthikavada ), 52, 60.5ff., n.625, 76.7f. See also Views:
wrong

Noble disciple ( ariyasavaka ), 2.9ff., 14.4, 36.9, 46.4, 64.6, 115.12,
n.1085, n.1087; and personality view, 22.16, 44.8, 109.11,

131.9, 138.21; seven knowledges of, 48.8ff. See also Disciple in
higher training

Noble Eightfold Path (ariya atthangika magga), 32ff, 9.11, 19.26,
33.24, 44.5, 44.9ff., 77.21, 83.21, 103.3, 104.5, 115.13, 126.14,
149.10, n.1341, 151.18; as Middle Way, 3.8ff., 139.5; as way to
end suffering, 9.18, 141.23; detailed analysis, 117.3ff., 141.23ff.

Noble one (ariya), 22.35, 39.28, 137.21ff„ 152.11'ff.

Noble One's Discipline (ariyassa vinaye), 8.4ff., 8.8ff., 36.7ff.,

38.27, 54.3ff., 65.13, 105.22, 140.33, 152.3ff.

Noble silence ( ariya tunhibhava), 26.4

Non-causality doctrine ( ahetukavada ), 52, 60.21ff., n.630, 76.13ff.

Non-cruelty (avihimsa), 8.12, n.108, 19.10, 114.8f., 135.8. See also
Intention; Thought

Non-doing doctrine (akiriyavada), 51, 60.13ff., n.629, 76.10ff.

Non-identification (atammayata), 47.13, n.488, 78.11, 113.21ff.,
n.1066, 137.20, n.1245

Non-ill will ( abydpada ), 19.9, 114.8f. See also Intention; Thought

Non-perception (asanna), 102.5ff., 102.9

Non-returner ( anagamin ), 43, 6.13, n.81, n.88, 10.46, 22.43, 34.7,
52.4ff„ 64.9ff„ n.675, 68.11ff., 70.27, 73.9, 73.11, 91.39, 118.10,
140.36, 142.5f. See also Disciple in higher training; Noble disciple


Index of Subjects 1393


Nothingness, base of ( akincannayatana ), 1.17, 8.10, 26.15, n.302,
30.19, 31.16, 43.10, 59.13, 66.32, 102.4, 105.12, 140.21f., 143.12;
and voidness, 121.8; as basis for insight, 52.14, 64.15, 111.15f,;
as blindfolding Mara, 25.18, 26.40; deliverance of mind
through, 43.30, 43.32, 43.36, n.455; way to, 106.6ff., n.1014
Not self ( anatta ), 27f, 8.3, n.1331; aggregates as, 22.16, 22.26f.,
22.40, 35.4, 35.20, 35.24f„ n.374, 62.3, 109.13, 109.16; all things,
35.4, 115.12; elements as, 28.6ff., 62.8ff., 112.8, 140.4ff.; sense
experience as, 144.9f„ 146.6ff., 147.3ff., 148.10ff.

Nutriment ( ahara ), 9.10ff., n.120, 38.9ff., 38.15f., n.407, 50.18

Obstinacy ( thambha ), 3.13, 7.3ff., 15.3ff., 135.15
Offence ( dpatti ), 5.10ff„ 48.11, 65.23ff„ 103.9ff„ 104.16ff., 105.22
Omniscience ( sabbannutd ), 14.17, 71.5, n.714, 76.21ff., 79.6, 90.5ff.
Once-returner ( sakadagamin ), 42, 6.12, 22.44, 34.8, 68.12ff., 118.11,
142.5f. See also Disciple in higher training; Noble disciple
One beyond training ( asekha ). See Arahant
Oral tradition ( anussava ), 76. 24ff., 95.14f., 100.7, 102.15f.

Ordinary person ( puthujjana ), 1.3ff., n.4, 2.5ff., 24.13, 36.8, 46.3,
64.5, n.675, 115.12, n.1087, 137.14, 142.5f.; and personality
view, 22.15, 44.7, 109.10, 131.8, 138.20
Origin ( samudaya ): of personality, 44.3, 148.16ff.; of suffering,
29ff., 9.16, 28.28, 38.17, 38.30, 75.24, 115.11, 138.3, 141.21,

145.3. See also Dependent origination; Four Noble Truths
Overestimation {adhimana), 105.5
Overlord ( abhibhu ), 1.14, n.15, 49.22

Paccekabuddha, n.440, 116.3ff., n.1095, 142.5f.

Pain ( dukkha ), 141.16. See also Feeling; Grief; Suffering
Patimokkha, 6.2, 53.7, 104.5, 108.10. See also Virtue
Pavarana, 118.3

Peace ( upasama , santi), 8.8ff., 26.15f., 26.19, 40.13, 64.9ff., 75.18,
83.21, 102.25; bliss of, 66.21, 122.3, 139.9; foundation of, 140.28
Perception {sanna), 1.3ff., n.5, 18.4, 18.8, 18.16, n.229, 43.8f., 75.16,
78.12f., 102.4, 102.6, 102.9, 106.2ff., 114.9, 152.11; aggregate of,
28.28, 109.8f.; and voidness, 121. 4ff.; not self, 35.17
Personality ( sakkaya ), 44.2ff., 64.8, 102.12, 106.13, 148.16ff.; view,
2.11, n.42, 44.7f., n.462, 64.2ff., 109.10f. 131. 8f., 138.20
Persons ( puggala ): four kinds, 5.2, n.69, 51.5ff., 66.13, 136.8; seven
kinds, 70.14ff.; two kinds, H4.48


1394 The Majjhima Nikaya


Perturbable ( ihjita ), 66.22ff.

Pleasure ( sukha ), 7.8, 40.8, 62.27, 118.19, 139.9; gradation of,
59.7ff.; in jhana, 39.15ff., 43.19f„ 77.25ff., 119.18ff.; non-sen-
sual, 14.4, 36.32, 68.6, 75.10, 75.12, 80.131, 102. 191; sensual,
13.7, 59.6, 66.19, 80.13, 139.9; to be gained through pain?,
14.20, 85. 91, 101.27. See also Feeling; Joy; Sensual pleasures
Positions of beings ( sattapada ), 137.9ff., 137.16
Possibilities ( thana ), 115.12ff.

Postures ( iriydpatha ), 4.20, 10.6, 119.5, 122.11
Poverty, 129.25, 135.13

Powers {bald), 77.19, 103.3, 104.5, 118.13, 149.10, 151.16
Presumption (s arambha), 3.13, 7.3ff.

Proliferation ( papahca ), 11.5, n.169, 18.8, 18.16, n.229, n.232
Pupil's undoing (antevasiipaddava), 122.23
Pure Abodes (suddhavasa), 47, 12.57ff. See also Non-returner
Pure Radiance, gods of ( parisuddhabha devata), 127.9ff.
Purification ( visuddhi ): in four castes, 90.17, 93.4ff.; of offerings,
14g.9ff.; seven stages of, 24.9ff., n.288; theories of, 12.52ff.

Rapture (piti), 7.8, 40.8, 62.27, 102.17f„ 118.19, n.1118, enlighten-
ment factor of, 118.33; in jhana, 39.15f., 43.19f., 77.25T,

119.18f.; non-sensual, 14.4, 68.6, 99.17. See also Enlightenment
factors; Jhanas

Reappearance ( upapatti ), 45/f., 57.8, 68.8ff., n.1091; by aspiration,
41.15ff„ 120. 2ff.; in bad destination, 4.29, 7.2, 12.37ff„ 13.15,
40.3, 41.4ff., 45.3, 45.5, 46.14f„ 50.13, 57.3, 57.5, 60.9ff., 84.6,
110.13, 115.17, 129.6, 130.2ff„ 135.5ff., 136.8ff., n.1231; in
happy destination, 4.29, 7.2, 12.40f., 41 .4ff ., 45. 6f., 46.16f.,

50.17, 60.12ff„ 84.7, 110.24, 115.17, 127.9, 129.31, 135.6ff„
136.8ff.; of liberated one, 72.16f., 120.37. See also Action;
Divine eye

Reasoning ( takka ), 76.27ff., 95.14f., 100.7, 102. 15f.

Recluse ( samana ), 11.2f„ n.166, 27.7, 39.2ff., 39.23, 40.2ff„ 84.9,

89.17. See also Bhikkhu; Recluses and brahmins

Recluses and brahmins ( samanabrahmana ), 48ff., 4.4ff., 4.21, 35.24,
38.24, 46.22, 48.10, 61.18, 88.8ff„ 89.10, 89.12, 117.37, 121.13,
150.4ff., 151.21; and eightfold path, 126.9, 126.14; and full
understanding, ll.lOff., 13.17, 13.31, 13.38; and Mara, 25.8ff.,
26.32ff., 34.3, 49.5; and sense pleasures, 13.17, 25.8, 36.17, 45.3,
75.18; capacity for enlightenment, 36.17ff.; diversity among.


Index of Subjects 1395


100.7; views of, 11.6ff„ 12.52ff., 60.5ff., 102.2ff., 136.9ff.
Recollection of past lives ( pubbenivdsanussati ), 4.27, 6.12, 27.23,
36.38, 51.24, 71.7, 73.22, 76.47, 79.7f„ 79.41, 101.42, 108.21,
119.40; with simile, 39.19, 77.34

Refuge, going for (saramgamana), 4.35, 7.21, 27.27, 30.24, 41.44,
54.26, 56.15, 73.15, 74.16, 84.10, 85.61, 91.37, 94.32, 142.4
Refulgent Glory, gods of ( subhakinM deva), 1.12, n.13, 49.10,
49.20, 57.9

Relinquishment ( caga ), 140.27

Renunciation ( nekkhamma ), 19.8, n.699, 125.7, 137.11, 137.13,
137.15; bliss of, 66.21, 122.3, 139.9. See also Going forth;
Intention; Thought

Resting place (senSsana), 2.15, 77.81., 114.43. See also Seclusion
Restlessness and remorse ( uddhaccakukkucca ), n.158, 48.8, 108.26;

abandoning of, 27.18, 39.13, 51.19. See also Hindrances
Restraint ( samvara ): in six bases, 105.28ff.; of sense faculties, 2.12,
n.44, 27.15, n.322, 33.20, 39.8, 51.16, 53.8, 69.10, 75.8, 107.4,
125.16; of taints, 2.2ff.

Revenge ( upanaha ), 3.9, 7.3ff., 15.3ff., 40.3, 104.6
Robe ( civara ), 2.13, 77.8f., 114.41

Root ( mula ): of all things, 1.2, n.3; of disputes, 104.6; of unwhole-
some, 9.5; of wholesome, 9.7

Round of births ( samsara ), 27, 30, 40, n.132, 12.57, 22.32, 38.2ff.

See also Reappearance

Rules and observances (sTlabbata), 2.11, 9.34, ll.lOff., 64.3

Samannaphala Sutta, n.585, n.621, n.630-31, n.750, n.752, n.755
Samsara. See Round of births

Sangha, 7.7, 52.16, 65.30f., 67.7ff„ 69.3ff„ 108.7ff„ 118.8ff.; gifts to,
142.2, 142.7f., n.1292, nn.1301-2; harmony in, 103.4ff., 104.5ff.;
practising good way, 27.3ff., 27.26, 47.14f., 51. Iff., 89.10ff. See
also Bhikkhu; Bhikkhuru(s)

Scrutiny (tulana), 95.23
Search {pariyesanS ), 26.5, 26.12
Seats (asana), 69.4

Seclusion (viveka), 2.21, 3.5ff., 12.48, 27.17, 39.12, 44.21, 51.18,
65.14f„ 77.81., 88.4, 107.8, 122.6, 122.22ff., 125.20, 146.13; bliss
of, 66.21, 122.3, 139.9

Security from bondage (yogakkhema), 1.27, 16.26, 17.3, 26.12,
26.18, 37.2f., 52.3ff., 53.19



1396 The Majjhima Nikaya


Seeing ( dassana ), 2.5ff.

Seen ( dittha ), 1.19, 22.15f., 112.3f.

Self ( atta ). See Not self; Views: of self

Self-mortification ( attakilamatha ), 12.44ff., 14.17, 36.5, 36.20ff.,
40.5f., 45.5, 51.8, 51.10, 101.2, 101.12ff., 139.4
Sensed ( muta ), 1.21, 22.15f., 112.3f.

Sensual desire ( kama , kamacchanda ), 2.6, 2.20, n.158, 16.8, 19.3,
22.9, 33.6, 33.19, 48.8, 64.2ff„ 108.26, 122.15. See also
Covetousness; Craving; Hindrances; Sensual pleasures;

Taints

Sensual pleasures (kama), 19.26, 22.9, n.252, 76.51, 106.2f., 125.7,
139.3; cords of ( kamaguna ), 13.7, 23.4, 25.7, 26.31, 38.29, 59.6,
66.18, 67.18, 75.9ff„ 80.12, 99.16, 105.7, 122.14f., 139.9, 151.9;
danger in, 13.8ff., 14.4, 22.3, 45.3, 54.15ff., 75.16ff.; full under-
standing of, 13.7ff.; misconduct in, 41.8, 41.12, 114.5; similes
for, 19.26, 22.3, 54.15ff., 75.13ff. See also Pleasure: sensual;
Sensual desire

Serenity (samatha), 38jf., 63, 32.5, 43.14, 48.9, 73.18, 149.10,

149.11, 151.19. See also Concentration; Jhana
Service ( paricariya ), 96.3
Seven bodies, doctrine of, 76.16ff.

Shackles in heart ( cetaso vinibandha), 16.8ff.

Shame ( hiri ), 39.3, n.416, 53.12
Sharing, 48.6, 104.21
Short life, 135.5
Sickliness, 135.7

*

Sign ( nimitta ): five, 20.2ff.; of beauty, 5.6f.; of concentration,

36.45, n.392, 122.10; of sense object, 122.10
Signless (animitta): concentration, 121. 10f., n.1142; contact, 44.20;

deliverance of mind, 43.28ff., 43.34, 43.37, n.449, n.457
Sixfold base (salayatana). See Bases

Sloth and torpor ( thlnamiddha ), n.158, 48.8, 108.26, 128.18; aban-
doning of, 27.18, 39.13, 51.19. See also Hindrances
Sorrow (s oka), 26.10, 141.14. See also Grief
Space element ( akasadhatu ), 28.26, 62.12, 140.18
Speech ( vaca ): five courses of, 21.11ff.; of Tathagata, 58.8; right,
60.11ff., 117.18ff„ n.1109, 139.10ff„ 141.26; wrong, 60.8ff., 117.17
Spiritual power, bases for ( iddhipada ), 16.26, 77.17, 103.3, 104.5,
118.13, 149.10, 151.14
Steward-treasure, 129.40


Index of Subjects 1397


Stream-enterer ( sotapanna ), 42, n.35, 6.11, n.80, n.88, 22.45, 34.9,

48.15, 68.13ff., 118.12, 142.5f., 146.27. See also Disciple in high-
er training; Noble disciple

Streaming Radiance, gods of ( dbhassara deva), 1.11, n.12, 49.10,
49.19

Striving (padhdna), 16.26, 70.23, 77.17, 95.22, 101.23ff.; five factors
of, 85.58f., 90.10ff.; right, 44.12, 77.16, 78.10ff., 103.3, 104.5,
118.13,149.10, 151.13
Stupidity, 135.17
Success (iddhi), 129.42ff.

Suffering ( dukkha ), 25ff., n.29, 2.8, 10.2, 11. 7f., 13.8ff., 22.38,
29.2ff„ 30.8ff„ 35.21, 67.17ff„ 68.5, 77.14, 87.3ff., 101.23, 136.2,
136.6, 138.3, 139.4, 139.13, 145.3f., 149.3; as noble truth, 2.11,
9.15, 10.44, 28.3, 141.10ff.; end of, 2.22, 12.2, 12.26, 14.17, 20.8,
48.6ff., 144.11, 148.28ff. See also Four Noble Truths;
Impermanence: suffering, not self
Suicide, 144.5ff.

Superhuman states ( uttarimanussadhamma ), 12.2, n.178, 26.27,
31.10ff., 65.14f„ 69.19, 99.10ff„ 128.15
Supernormal power (iddhi), 6.14, 11.6, 37.11, 56.13, 73.19, 77.31,
108.13, 119.37, n.1360. See also Buddha: supernormal powers
Sustained thought ( vicara ), 43.19f., 44.15. See also Jhana

Taints (asava), 38, 2.2ff., n.32, n.37, 9.69ff„ 36.47, 49.30, 68.7,
121.12; bases for, 65.30f.; liberation from, 2.3, n.33, n.49, 6.19,
7.18. 12.24, 12.36. 12.42, 25.20, 26.42, 30.21, 31.18, 32.17, 40.14,
41.43, 52.3ff., 53.22, 54.24, 64.9ff., 71.9, 73.24, 74.14, 77.36,
108.23, 112.3ff., 119.42, 121.11, 146.13, 147.10. See also
Deliverance: by wisdom; Knowledge of destruction of taints
Taking what is not given ( adinnadana ), 41.8, 54.4, 54.7, 114.5;

abstention from, 27.13, 41.12, 51.14, 114.5
Talk (katha): pointless, 76.4, 77.4, 78.3, 79.5, 122.12; suitable, 26.4,
43.14, 122.12, 122.20

Tathagata, 24f., 1.147ft., 11.14, 19.26, 47.16, 55.7ff., 58.8, 58.11,

72.15, 72.20, n.723, 88.13, 88.17, 101.46, 102.4, 105.27, 107.3,
107.14, 142.5f.; abiding in voidness, 121.2, 122.6; after death,
25.10, 63.2ff., 72.9ff., 72.20, n.719; appears in world, 27.11,
51.12; footprints of, 27.19ff.; free from taints, 36.47, 49.30, 68.7;
intrepidities, 12.22ff.; investigation of, 47.4ff.; powers of,
12.9ff.; wonderful qualities of, 123.2ff., 123.22. See also Buddha


1398 The Majjhima Nikaya


Teacher's undoing (acariyupaddava), 122.22
Thirty-three, gods of ( tavatimsa deva), 12.29f., 31.21, 37.6, 41.19,
75.11, 83.13, 90.14, 97.30, 120.7, 134.2, n.1222
Thought (vitakka), 18.16, 117.14, 125.24; removing, 2.20, n.47,
20.3ff., 33.19; twofold, 19.2ff., 122.13. See also Intention
Titans (asura), 37.8
Tortures, 13.14, 129.4, 130.7

Tranquillity ( passaddhi ), 7.8, 40.8, 118.34. See also Enlightenment
factors

Transcendence, bases for ( abhibhayatana ), 77.23, nn.765-67
True Knowledge ( vijja ), 37/., 4.28ff., 11.17, 36.39ff., 39.19ff„ 44.29,
53.24, 71.6ff„ 73.28, 118.41ff., 119.22, 148.28ff„ 149.11, 151.20
True man (s appurisa), 110.14ff., 113.2ff.

Truth ( sacca ), 54.4, 95.15ff., 99.21; foundation of, 140.26; in
speech, 27.13, 41.13, 47.14, 58.8, 114.6
Tusita heaven, 31.21, 41.21, 97.30, 120.9, 123.3ff„ 143.16

Uglindss, 135.9

Underlying tendencies ( anusaya ), 9.8ff., 18.8, 32.4, 44.25ff., n.473,
64.3, 64.6, n.651, 148.28ff.

Understanding (others' minds), 6.16, 12.8, 12.37ff., 31.20, 73.21,
77.33, 108.20, 119.39

Unity (ekatta), 1.23, n.18, 54.15, 54.21, 102.14, 137.19
Untrue man (asappurisa), 110.3ff., 113.2ff.

Unwholesome ( akusala ), 8.15, 9.3f., 18.8, 19.7, 20.3ff., 21.8,
39.23ff., 60.7ff., 61.9ff„ 70‘.7ff., 73.3ff., 77.16, 78.9ff„ 88.10ff.,
n.832, 101.27, 106.2f„ U4.5ff., U7.35f., 122.22ff.; root of, 9.5
Unwise attention ( ayoniso manasikara), 2.3, 2.5ff., n.33, n.158
Uposatha, n.59, 83.3, n.809, 108.10, 118.3, 129.34
Urgency, sense of (s amvega), 28.10, 37.11

Vanity ( mada ), 3.15, 7.3ff.

Vedas, 91.2, n.850, 93.3, 95.8

View, right ( sammU ditthi), 9.2ff., n.114, 41.4, 43.13f., 60.11ff.,
114.10, nn.1101-4, 141.24, 149.10; as forerunner, 117.4ff.,
117.34f.; emancipating, 48.6ff., 104.21; person with, 48.11ff.,
115.12; tainted, 117.7; taintless, 117.8
Views (ditthi), 11.6f., 22.24, 74.4; adherence to, 8.12ff., 15.3ff.,
15.6f., 38.14, 74.6ff., 103.10ff., 104.11; of self, 2.8, n.39, 8.3,
n.102, U.9ff„ 22.15f., 22.20f., 22.23, 22.25, n.256, 44.7, 102.2ff.,


Index of Subjects 1399


102.14ff„ 109.10, 131.8, 138.20; of world, 8.3, 48.8, 102.14ff. ;
pernicious, 22.2ff., 38.2ff., 49.2, 93.18; purification of, 24.9ff.;
speculative, 25.10, 63.2ff., 72.3ff.; thicket of, 2.8, 72.14; wrong,
40.3, 40.7, 41.10, n.425, n.581, 57.3, 57.5, n.601, 60.8ff., 104.10,
114.10, 117.5

Virtue (stla), 6.2, n.76, 24.2, 32.7, 43.14, 44.11, 48.6, 53.7, 77.11,
78.11, 81.18, 104.21, 107.3, 108.14, 125.15, 142.3f.; complacency
over, 29.3, 30.9; of bhikkhu, 27.13, 51.14; purification of,

24.9ff. See also Conduct
Visuddhimagga, n.288
Vitality (dyu), 43.22, n.444

Voidness (sunnatd): abiding in, 121.2, n.1137, 121.13, 122.6ff.,

151. 2ff.; contact, 44.20; deliverance of mind, 43.30, 43.33,
43.35ff., n.450, n.1152; descent into, 121.4ff.; of self, 43.33,
106.7, nn.1015-16

Wakefulness (jdgariya ), 39.10, 53.10, 69.12, 107.6, 125.18
Wanderers (paribbajaka), 11.3, 13.2, 54.25, 59.16, 76.4, 77.4, 78.3
Water element ( apodhatu ), 1.4, 28.1 Iff., 49.12, 62.9, 140.15; medi-
tation like, 62.14. See also Elements
Wealth, 96.10ff„ 135.14
Wheel-treasure, 129.34f.

Wheel-turning Monarch (cakkavattT raja), 91.5, 92.10, 115.14f.,
129.33ff.

Wholesome ( kusala ), 8.13, 8.15, 9.6, 19.7, 20.3, 21.8, 26.15, 60.10ff.,
61.9ff„ 70.7ff„ 73.3ff., 76.43ff., 77.16, 78.9ff., 88.14ff., 96.13,
99.4, 99. 8f., 99.21, 101.27, 114.5ff„ 117.35f„ 122.18; root of, 9.7
Wield power over others' creations, gods who ( paraninimitavasa -
vattldevct), 31.21, 41.23, 97.30, 120.11
Wilderness in heart ( cetokhila ), 16.3ff.

Wisdom {patina): 38f, 4.19, 24.2, 32.7, 43.2f„ 43.5f., 43.11f., n.429, '
nn.432-33, 44.11, 53.17, n.561, 69.16, 70.18, 77.13, 85.58, 90.10,
106.3ff., 111.2, 117.8, n.1103, 135.18, 140.13ff.; foundation of,
140.25; lucidity of, 12.62, 27.2, 99.30; noble, 12.56, 23.4, 105.27,
140.25, 146.12. See also Full understanding; View, right
Wise attention (yoniso manasikara), 2.3, 2.11, n.33, 43.13
Wise man (pandita), 33.5, 115.2, 129.27
Woman-treasure, 129.39
Women, 67.19, 68.2ff„ 73.11ff„ 115.15
Worldliness ( alaya ), 26.19, n.306



1400 The Majjhima Nikaya


Wrong eightfold path, 19.26/ 11 7.35, 126.9
Yama gods, 31.21, 41.20, 97.30, 120.8

Zeal (chanda), 95.25. See also Spiritual power, bases for; Striving:
right


Index of Proper Names


Abhaya, Prince, 58.2ff v n.611
Abhiya Kaccana, 127.13ff.

Acela Kassapa, 124.2ff.
Aciravata, novice 125.2ff.
Aciravatl, river, 88.7, 88.19
Ajatasattu, King, 35.12, 88.18,
108.2

Ajita Kesakambalin, 51 , 30.2,
36.48, n.750, 77.6
Alara Kalama, 26.15, 26.22
Ambalatthika, 61.2
Ananda, 21, 18.22, 26.2, 32.1,
32.3, 36.3, 59.4ff„ 64.4ff„
67.3ff., 68.2, 81.2ff„ 83.2ff„
83.21, 85.7, 88.2ff., 104.3ff„
106.10ff., 108.1ff„ 136.3ff.,
143.3, 152.3ff.; and "One
Fortunate Attachment,"
132.2ff.; as learned, 32.4; on
destruction of taints, 52. Iff. ;
on disciple in higher train-
ing, 53.5ff.; on gods, 90.14;
on good and bad conduct,
88.8ff.; on holy life, 76.6ff.;
on ideal bhikkhu, 32.4; on
Tathagata's qualities,
123.2ff.; questions on ele-
ments, 115.4ff.; questions on
voidness, 121. 2ff.
Anathapindika, 23, 143.2ff.


Angans, 39.1, 40.1, 77.6
Angulimala, 86.2ff.
Anguttarapans, 54.1, 66.1, 92.1
Anuruddha, 31 .2ff ., n.354,
32.1f., 32.6, 32.13, n.360,

68.2, 127.2ff„ 128.8ff„ n.1189
Apana, 54.1, 66.1f„ 92.1
Arittha, 22.2ff., n.251
Assagutta, n.786
Assaji (1), 35.3f., n.370
Assaji (2), 70.4ff„ n.697
Assalayana, 93.3ff.

Assapura, 39.1, 40.1
Atthakanagara, 52.2
Avantiputta, King, 84.2ff.

Bahuka, river, 7.19
Baka Brahma, 49.2ff., n.499
Bakkula, 124. Iff.

Balaka, 56.5
Balakalonakara, 128.7
Bamboo Grove, 23, 24.1, 44.1

61.1.69.1.73.1, 77.1,79.1,

97.1. 108.1. 108.25. 124.1,

125.1. 126.1. 136.1. 144.1,
150.1

Beluvagamaka, 52.1
Benares, 26.24ff., 81.13f., 94.1,
141. If.

Bhaddali, 65.3ff.


1401


1402 The Majjhima Nikaya


Bhagga country, 15.1, 50.1, 85.1
Bhaggava, potter, 140.1
Bhagu, 68.2, 128.7
Bharadvaja, 98.3ff.

Bhesakala Grove, 15.1, 50.1, 85.1
Bhumija, 126.2ff.

Bimbisara, King Seniya, 23,
14.20ff„ 95.9
Black Rock, 14.15
Blind Men's Grove, 23.1, 24.5,
147.2

Bodhi, Prince, 85.2ff.

Brahma Sahampati, 26.20f.,
67.8f.

Brahma Sanankumara, 53.22,
n.566

Brahmayu, 91.2ff.

•0

Campa, 51.1
Candalakappa, 100.2
Candana, 134.2
Cankl, 95.2, 98.2, 99.13
Catuma, 67.1
Channa, 144.2ff.

Culanaga, Tipitaka, n.1337
Cunda, novice, 104.3f.

Dandapani Sakyan, 18.3ff.,
n.226

Dasama, 52.2ff.

Devadaha, 101.1
Devadatta, n.226, 29.1, n.346,
58.3

Devala the Dark, 93.18, n.874
Dhammadinna, 21, 44.1ff., n.459
Dhananjani, 97.2ff .

Dhananjani, 100.2
Digha Karayana, 89.2, 89.8,
n.835

Dlghanakha, 74.1ff., 74.15, n.730
Digha Parajana, 31.21


Digha TapassI, 56.2ff., 56.20ff.
Dummukha, 35.23
DusI, 50.8, n.517

Eastern Park, 26.3, 37.1, 88.2,
107.1, 109.1, 110.1, 118.1,
121.1

Esukarl, 96.2ff.

Gaggara Lake, 51.1
Ganaka Moggallana, 107.1ff.
Ganges, river, 21.16, 34. If., 64.8
Gaya, 26.25
Ghata Sakyan, 122.2
Ghatlkara, 81.6ff.

Ghosita's Park, 48.1, 76.1, 128.1
Ghotamukha, 94.2
Gopaka Moggallana, 108.4ff.
Gosinga Wood, 31.2, 32.1
Great Wood, 35.1, 36.1, 71.1,
105.1

Gulissani, 69.2

Haliddavasana, 57.1
Homer, I.B., n.57, n.306, n.743,
n.759, n.784, n.1210, n.1253

Icchanangala, 98.1
Indra, 22.36. See also Sakka
Isidatta, 89.18
Isigili, 14.5, 116.1ff.

Isipatana, 26.26, 141. If.

Janussoni, 4.2, n.56, 27.2ff.,

98.2, 99.13, 99.30f.

Jayasena, Prince, 125.2ff.,
126.2ff.

Jeta's Grove, 23, 2.1 passim
Jlvaka Komarabhacca, 55.1ff.,
n.573

Jotipala, 81.6ff.


Index of Proper Names 1403


Kajangala, 152.1
Kakusandha, Buddha, 50.9ff.,
n.518

Kala Buddharakkhita, n.394
Kalakhemaka Sakyan, 122.2
Kalarajanaka, 83.20
Kail (1), 21.9
Kali (2), 50.8
Kamboja, 93.6

Kammasadhamma, 10.1, 75.1,

106.1

Kandaraka, 51.1 ff.
Kannakatthala, 90.1
Kapathika, 95.11ff.
Kapilavatthu, 14.1, 18.1, 53.1,

122.1. 134.1. 142.1
Kasi, 70.1

Kassapa, Buddha, 81.3ff.
Keniya, 92.2ff.

KikI, King, 81.14ff.

Kimbila, 31.2, 68.2, 128.8ff.

Kisa Sankicca, 36.5, 76.53
Kltagiri, 70.3ff.

Koliyans, 57.1
Koravya, King, 82.27ff.

Kosala, 41.1, 60.1, 68.1, 81.1,

95.1. 100.1

KosambI, 48.1, n.491, 76.1, 128.1
Kosiya, 37.8
Kukkuta's Park, 52.2
Kumara Kassapa, 23.1ff.
Kundadhana, 68.2
Kurus, 10.1, 75.1, 82.1, 106.1
Kusinara, 103.1

Licchavis, 35.5ff.
Lomasakangiya, 134.1ff.

Madhura, 84.1
Magadha, 26.20, 77.6
Magandiya, 75.3ff.


Maha Cunda, 8.2ff., 144.2ff.
Maha Kaccana, 21, 18.10ff.,
84.2ff„ 133.7ff„ n.1220,
138.5ff.

Maha Kassapa, 32.1f., 32.7,
32.14, n.361

Maha Kotthita, 43. Iff., n.428
Maha Moggallana, 21, 5.3ff.,
15.1ff., 32.1f., 32.8, 32.15,
37.5ff., 50.1ff., n.659, 67.13,
69.20, 141.5, n.1289
Mahanama Sakyan, 14.2ff.,
14.1, 53.6ff.

Mahapajapatl GotamI, 142.2ff.,
n.1291, 146.2
Makhadeva, King, 83.3ff
Makkhali Gosala, 50, 30.2, 36.5,
36.48, n.630, 76.53, n.752, 77.6
Maliyadeva, n.1337
Mallika, Queen, 87.5f., 87.23ff.
Mallika's Park, 78.1
Malunkyaputta, 63.2ff., n.648,
64.2f.

Mango Grove, 55.1
Mara, 47, n.10, 12.29f„ 19.26,
25.7ff„ 25.12ff., 26.34ff„
49.5ff., 49.29f., n.499, 50.2ff.,
n.517, 115.15, 119.23ff.;
power of, 25.8ff., 49.6; realm
of, 34.3ff„ 106.2
Matali, 83.14
Medalumpa, 89.1
Migara's Mother's Palace, 26.3,
37.1, 50.26, 88.2, 107.1,

109.1,110.1,118.1, 121.1
Mithila, 83.1ff., 91.2,91.24
Moliya Phagguna, 21.2ff.

Nadika, 31.1
Nagaraka, 89.2f.

Nagaravinda, 150.1


1404 The Majjhima Nikaya


Nagasamala, 12.64
Nalakapana, 68.1
Najanda, 56.1f., 56.13
Nalijangha, 87.6
Nanamoli, Bhikkhu, n.l,

nn.5-6, nn.21-22, nn.57-58,
n.67, n.90, n.135, n.176,
n.232, n.306, n.334, n.511,
n.513, n.583, n.585, n.759,
n.761, n.784, n.949, n.959,
n.1016, n.1210, n.1253,
n.1270

Nanananda, Bhikkhu, n.229,
n.1210

Nandaka, 146. 3ff.

Nandana Grove, 75.11
Nanda Vaccha, 36.5, 76.53
Nandiya, 31.2, 68.2, 128.8ff.
Niganiha Nataputta, 51, 14.17,
302, 36.48, 56.2ff„ 56.20ff.,
n.599, 58.2f„ 77.6, 104.2; as
omniscient, 14.17, n.754,
79.6, 101.10

Nigrodha's Park, 14.1, 18.1,
53.1, 122.1, 134.1, 142.1
Nimi, King, 83.12ff.
Nyanaponika Thera, n.91, *
n.133, n.135, n.259, n.334

Opasada, 95.1

Pajapati, 1.9, n.10, 22.36, 49.5,
49.17

Pajjota, King, 108.2
Pakudha Kaccayana, 51, 30.2,
36.48, n.752, 77.6
Pancakanga, 59.2ff., 78.2ff.,
127.2ff.

Panduputta, 5.31
Parasariya, 152.2


Pasenadi, King, 24.14, 35.12,
86.8ff., 87.5, 87.24ff., 88.3ff„
89.2ff„ 90.2ff„ 95.8f., 99.31
Pataliputta, 52.2, 94.33, n.879
Pava, 104.2

Pavarika's Mango Grove, 56.1
Pessa, 51.1, 51.4ff.

Pilotika, 27.2
Pingalakoccha, 30.2
Pokkharasati, 95. 8f., 98.2,
99.10ff.

Potaliputta, 136.2
Potaliya, 54.3ff.

Pukkusati, 140.3ff., 140.33,
n.1264

Punabbasuka, 70.4ff., n.697
Punna (1), 57.2ff.

Punna (2), 145.1ff.

Punna Mantaniputta, 24.2ff.,
n.287

Pur ana, 89.18
Purana Kassapa, 50, 30.2,
36.48, n.629, n.754, 77.6

Rahula, 61.2ff., n.637, 62.2ff„
n.641, 147.2ff.-

Rajagaha, 23, 5.31, 14.15, 24.1,

29.1.44.1. 55.1.61.1, 69.1,

73.1, 74.1, 77.1, 77.6, 79.1,

97.1. 108.1. 116.1. 124.1,

125.1. 126.1. 133.1. 136.1,
140.1,144.1,151.1

Rama, 26.16, n.303
Ratthapala, 82.4ff., n.796
Revata, 32. Iff., n.359, 68.2

Saccaka, 35.2ff., 36.2ff.

Saketa, 24.14
Sakka, 46, 37.2ff„ 50.28,
83.13ff„ 115.15


Index of Proper Names 1405


Sakula, 90.3

Sakuludayin, 77.211., 79.1ff.,
79.45f.

Sala, 41.1, 60.1
Samagama, 104.1
Samanamandikaputta, 78.1ff.
Samiddhi, 133.111., 136.211.
Samiti, 5.31
Sandaka, 76.211., 76.54
Sangarava, 100.311.

Sahjaya, 90.61., 90.16
Sahjaya Belatthiputta, 51, 30.2,
36.48, n.755, 77.6
Sahjikaputta, 85.3
Sanjiva, 50.911.

Sariputta, 21, 12.311., 24.3, 24.17,

32.1. 32.411., 32.16, 62.5,

74.14, n.1052, 141.5, n.1289,
150.2; advice to others,

97.611., 143.411., 144.411.; as
general, 92.181.; in dialogue,

24.611., 43.111.; insight ol,
111.311.; on blemishes, 5.111.;
on forest bhikkhu, 69.311.;
on Four Noble Truths,

9.1411., 28.211., 141.811.; on
heirs in Dhamma, 3.411.; on
ideal bhikkhu, 32.9; on right
view, 9.111.; on what should
be cultivated, 114.411.;
praise ol, 24.17, 111.2,
111.2111.; reproached, 67.12,
97.38

Sati, 38.211., 38.41
Savatthl, 23, 2.1 passim
Sela, 92.611.

Senanigama, 26.17
Seniya, 57.211.

Soma, 90.3

Soma Thera, n.133, n.135


Subha, 99.211., 135.211., n.1223
Subhaga Grove, 1.1, 49.1
Subhuti, 139.14, n.1263
Sudhamma Hall, 50.29, 83.13
Sumsumaragira, 15.1, 50.1, 85.1
Sunakkhatta, 12.211., n. 177,
105.311.

Sunaparanta, 145.5
Sundarl, n.831

Sundarika Bharadvaja, 7.1911.

Tarukkha, 98.2, 99.13
Thullakotthita, 82.111.

Todeyya, 98.2, 99.2, 99.13

Udayin (1), 59.211., 66.311.
Udayin (2), 136.6
Uddaka Ramaputta, 26.16,
n.303, 26.23
Udena, 94.111.

Ujunna, 90.1
Ukkacela, 34.1
Ukkattha, 1.1, 49.2, n.499
Upaka, 26.25, n.310
Upali, 56.511.

Uruvela, 26.17, 26.25
Uttara (1), 91.411.

Uttara (2), 152.2
Vacchagotta, 71.211., n.712,

72.211., 73.211.

Vajiri, 87.24
Vajjians, 31.21, 34.1
Vasabha, Queen, 87.25
Vasettha, 98.311.

Vassakara, 108.611.

Vebhalinga, 81.3, 81.51.
Vedehika, 21.9

Vejayanta Palace, 37.811., 50.27
Vekhanassa, 80.211.

Veranja, 42.2


1406 The Majjhima Nikaya


Vesall, 12.1, 35.1, 36.1, 52.1,
71.1, 105.1

Vessavana, King, 37.9ff.
Videhans, 34.2, 83.13, 91.1
Vidhura, 50.9, 50.20f.
Vidudabha, 87.26, 90.14, 90.16
Visakha, 44.1ff.


Vulture Peak, 14.15, 29.1, 74.1,
116.2

Watanabe, Fumimaro, n.362

Yama, King, 130.3ff., n.1206
Yona, 93.6


Index of Similes


Air, meditation like, 62.16
Archer, 12.62
Arrowsmith, 101.28

Bag of grain, 10.10, 119.7
Ball of string, 119.26
Bath powder, 39.15, 77.25,
119.18

Beryl gem on thread, 77.29,
123.12

Bhikkhu, 12.21
Blind turtle, 129.24
Borrowed goods, 22.3, 54.20
Bronze dish, 5.4ff.

Butcher carving ox, 36.24,
97.29, 143.4

Butter from curd, 126.17
Butter from water, 126.12

Calf, 67.7

Carcass on neck, 20.4
Cat awaiting mouse, 50.13
Catching snake, 22.10ff.
Catskin bag, 21.18
Cesspit, 12.38
Changing postures, 20.6
Charcoal pit, 12.37, 22.3, 54.18
Chariot, 21.7, 119.31
Chest of garments, 32.9
Cloth, 7.2, 7.12


Cowherd, 19.7, 19.12, 33.2,

33.15. 34.2, 34.4
Cow with calf, 48.12
Crab, 35.24

Creating artworks, 77.31
Crossing desert, 39.14
Cut-up cow, 10.12, 119.8

Daughter-in-law, 28.10, 37.9

Delicious food, 105.15

Dog circling post, 102.12

Donkey, 50.13

Drawing in space, 21.14

Dream, 22.3, 54.19

Drink of curd, 46.21

Drops on hot plate, 66.16, 152.9

Earth, meditation like, 62.13
Elephant at play, 35.5, 56.7
Elephant's footprint, 27.3ff.,
28.2

Extending arm, 26.20, 37.6,

37.13. 49.3, 67.8, 152.8

File of blind men, 95.13, 99.9
Filling a jug, 119.25, 119.28
Fire extinguished, 72.19
Fire from woods, 90.12, 93.11
Fire in grass-shed, 115.2
Fire, meditation like, 62.15


1407


1408 The Majjhima Nikaya


Fire reckoned by fuel, 38.8,
96.12

Fire-stick, 36.17, 119.24, 119.27,

126.13. 126.18. 140.19
Forcing cut of meat, 96.4, 96.11
Ford, 8.14

Forest deer, 26.32ff.

Gambler, 129.26, 129.49
Going through villages, 39.19,
77.34

Gold in furnace, 7.12
Grass in Jeta's Grove, 22.41
Grass torch, 22.3, 54.17
Great sala tree, 72.21

Heap of flowers, 56.30
Heartwood, 18.12, 29.2ff„
30.3ff., 35.22, 64.7, 133.9
Heating up Ganges, 21.16
Hen and eggs, 16.26, 53.19
Herd of deer, 19.25f„ 25.2ff.
Hidden treasure, 52.15, 128.20
Himalayas and stone, 129.9,
129.47

Honeyball, 18.22

Infant lying prone, 48.11, 58.7,
64.3, 78.8, 80.16
Infatuated brahmin, 56.27
Iron-spike, 58.3

Jackal awaiting fish, 50.13

Knowing path to village, 99.22

Lake filled by spring, 39.16,

77.26. 119.19

Lake in mountain, 39.21, 77.36
Leaf fallen from stalk, 105.11


Leper, 75.13ff.

Lotuses, 26.21, 39.17, 77.27,
119.20

Maluva-creeper pod, 45.4
Man asking about village,
105.9

Man bom blind, 75.20, 99.12
Man covered with cloth, 39.18,
77.28, 119.21
Man in love, 101.24ff.

Mansion, 12.41
Man struck with spears, 129.8
Man without hands, 76.52
Metal bowl, 5.29ff.

Milk from cow's horn, 126.11
Milk from udder, 126. 16..
Moon 146.15, 146.27
Most beautiful girl, 79.10

Oil from gravel, 126.10
Oil from sesamum, 126.15
Oil lamp, 43.22, 140.24, 146.9
Opening eyes, 152.4
Owl awaiting mouse, 50.13

Palm tree, 36.47, 49.30, 68.7,
105.17
Path, 8.14

Piece of meat, 22.3, 54.16
Pinnacle of house, 48.7
Placing garland on head, 5.33
Planing of felloe, 5.31
Plants based on earth, 35.10
Poisoned arrow, 63.5, 101.7,
105.19ff., 105.24ff.

Poisoned beverage, 46.19,
105.29

Poisoned gourd, 46.18
Poisonous snake, 105.30


Index of Similes 1409


Pond with cool water, 12.42,
40.13

Poor man, 66.11
Potter and clay, 122.27
Pouring water, 119.29
Pulling out reed, 77.30

Quail, 66.8

Raft, 22.13, 38.14
Raindrops, 152.6
Recovery from illness, 39.14
Refining gold, 140.20
Relay chariots, 24.14
Release from prison, 39.14
Release from slavery, 39.14
Removing earth, 21.12
Removing peg, 20.3
Reviewing gallnut, 120.12
Rich householder, 66.12
Road to Rajagaha, 107.14
Roasting a man, 36.25, 97.29,
143.4

Royal elephant, 61.7, 66.9

Saw, 21.20, 28.9
Seedlings, 67.7
Shadow over earth, 129.5,
129.30

Shutting eyes, 20.5
Sinking in mud, 8.16
Skeleton, 22.3, 54.15
Slaughterhouse, 22.3
Smith's bellows, 36.21
Snake's head, 22.3
Snapping fingers, 152.5
Space, meditation like, 62.17


Spitting, 152.7
Split stone, 105.13
Square pond, 119.30
Stone ball, 119.23
Streams and ocean, 119.22
Strong man, 20.7, 35.5, 36.20,
36.22f., 56.7, 97.29, 143.4
Success in business, 39.14
Sunlight and shade, 102.17ff.
Sim shining, 46.22
Surveying wheels, 32.6
Swimming across Ganges, 64.8
Sword stake, 22.3

Tamable elephants, 90.11,

125.8

Taming elephants, 125.12
Tending grove, 21.8
Thoroughbred colt, 65.33, 107.3
Training an elephant, 85.56f.
Traveller ambushed, 128.19
Tree and shadow, 146.10
Tree with foliage, 12.39ff.

Tree with fruit, 22.3, 54.21
Trumpeter, 77.32, 99.24
Turner, 10.4
Two friends, 125.9

Urine with medicine, 46.20

Viewing face in mirror, 15.8,
77.33

Watching people, 39.20, 77.35
Water, meditation like, 62.14
Weapon in sheath, 40.4
Works based on earth, 35.10



Index of Pali Terms
Discussed in Introduction and Notes


The Pali words are listed here in Indian alphabetical order.


atammayata, n.1066
atthaveda, n.91
adhikarana, n.982
adhikaranasamatha, n.983
adhitthdna, n.1270
anassama, n.784
anagatam vadapatham, n.761
anupadadhammavipassana, n.1046
anupadanaparinibbana, n.289
anupada paritassana, n.1253
anusaya, n.473
apannakadhamma, n.620
abhidhamma, n.362, n.693, n.970
abhibhayatana, n.765
abhibhu, n.15
abhivinaya, n.693
abhisankhata, n.551
amulhavinaya, n.988
asamhiram, asankuppam, n.1213
asamayavimokkha, n.348

anenja, n.1000
alaya, n.306


indriyabhavana, n.1352
isisattama, n.596

upakkilesa, n.86, n.1194
upadhi, n.299, n.654, n.674
upapajjati, n.1330
upadarn, n.176, n.289
upadinna, n.329

ekayana, n.135
evamdhamma, n.93

kama, n.252
kincana, n.454
kummasa, n.278

khadamya, n.686

gati, n.19 7
gandhabba, n.411

tinavattharaka, n.991
tiracchanakatha, n.748


1411


1412 The Majjhima Nikaya


danda, n.579
dvedhapatha, n.280

dhamma, 53f., n.3, n.157, n.1086
dhammadhatu, n.614
dhammanetti, n.985
dhammaveda, n.91
dhiti, n.197

ndga, n.75

ndparam itthattdya, n.67
nama, 56f
niyati, n.631
niyydtar, n.759

panndveyyattiya, n.197
patibhaga, n.477
papanca,n.719

pamanakatam kammam, n.915
paritassana, n.260
papiyyasika, n.990
parami, n.763

brahma, 57f.

bhaddekaratta, n.1210
bhunahuno, n.740
bhojaniya, n.686


mahhati, n,6
manopavicdra, n.1235
mdtika, n.365

rupa, 56f.

viparltasahhd, n.743
vimokkha, n.764
vedagu, n.863
vossagga, n.48

samvattanikam vihmmm, n.101 1
s ankhara, 55f., n.242, n.1086, n.1132
sangatibhava, n.631
s ati, n.197, n.560
satipatthana, n.136
sativinaya, n.986
sabba, n.3

sabbato pabham, n.5l3
sampajahha, n.147
sammukhavinaya, n.984
s allekha, n.106
sekha, n.21
sotthiya, n.421


About the Translators


Bhikkhu Nanamoli was born in England in 1905 and
entered the Buddhist monastic order in Sri Lanka in 1949.
During his eleven years in the Sangha he translated from
Pali into lucid English some of the most difficult texts of
Theravada Buddhism, including the Visuddhimagga. He
passed away in 1960 due to heart failure.


Bhikkhu Bodhi is an American monk born in New York
City in 1944. He was ordained as a monk in Sri Lanka in
1972 and is currently the president and editor of the
Buddhist Publication Society in Kandy. His previous pub-
lications include four major Pali suttas along with their
commentaries.


^ he Buddhist Publication Society


( ^ ec iicat^ t>HIST Publication Society is an approved charity
W Hich to making known the Teaching of the Buddha,
_^ s a vital message for people of all creeds,
ed in 1958, the BPS has published a wide variety
an d booklets covering a great range of topics. Its
ns delude accurate annotated translations of the
° t 'igirig 1 s discourses, standard reference works, as well as
pj, contemporary expositions of Buddhist thought
ls a , ctice. These works present Buddhism as it truly
° r the ^ naT Uic force that has influenced receptive minds
Wk^ ast 2,500 years and is still as relevant today as it
A fn^ n d first arose.

^ith an ^ st °f our publications will be sent upon request,
r hail enc losure of US $1.50 or its equivalent to cover air
s tage. Write to:


The Honorary Secretary
Buddhist Publication Society
P.O. Box 61

54, Sangharaja Mawatha
Kandy, Sri Lanka



The Buddhist Publication Society


The Buddhist Publication Society is an approved charity
dedicated to making known the Teaching of the Buddha,
which has a vital message for people of all creeds.

Founded in 1958, the BPS has published a wide variety
of books and booklets covering a great range of topics. Its
publications include accurate annotated translations of the
Buddha's discourses, standard reference works, as well as
original contemporary expositions of Buddhist thought
and practice. These works present Buddhism as it truly
is — a dynamic force that has influenced receptive minds
for the past 2,500 years and is still as relevant today as it
was when it first arose.

A full list of our publications will be sent upon request,
with an enclosure of US $1.50 or its equivalent to cover air
mail postage. Write to:


The Honorary Secretary
Buddhist Publication Society
P.O. Box 61

54, Sangharaja Mawatha
Kandy, Sri Lanka



Care ofDharma Books


Dharma books contain the teachings of the Buddha; they point the way
to freedom from lower rebirth and to final liberation. Therefore, they
should be treated with respect — kept off the floor and places where
people sit or walk — and not stepped over. They should be covered or
protected for transporting and kept in a high, clean place separate from
more “mundane" materials. Other objects should not be placed on top
of Dharma books and materials. Licking the fingers to turn pages is
considered bad form. If it is necessary to dispose of Dharma materials,
rather than throwing them in the trash, they should be burned, mind-
fully and iyith a reverential attitude.

*

These considerations may also be kept in mind for Dharma artwork, as
well as the written teachings and artwork of other religions. 
